In re Citizens Utilities Co. (97-436); 171 Vt. 447; 769 A.2d 19

[Filed 15-Dec-2000]


       NOTICE:  This opinion is subject to motions for reargument under
  V.R.A.P. 40 as well as formal  revision before publication in the Vermont
  Reports.  Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of  Decisions,
  Vermont Supreme Court, 109 State Street, Montpelier, Vermont 05609-0801 of
  any  errors in order that corrections may be made before this opinion goes
  to press.


                                 No. 97-436


In re Citizens Utilities Company	         Supreme Court

                                                 On Appeal from
    	                                         Public Service Board


                                                 November Term, 1999


Richard H. Cowart, Chair


Martin K. Miller and Victoria J. Brown of Miller, Eggleston & Cramer, Ltd., 
  Burlington, for Appellant Citizen Utilities Company.

Geoffrey Commons, Montpelier, for Appellee Vermont Department of Public Service.


PRESENT: Amestoy, C.J., Dooley, Morse, and Skoglund, JJ., and Gibson, J. (Ret.), 
         Specially Assigned


       DOOLEY, J.   Citizens Utilities Company appeals from an order of the
  Public Service  Board imposing various penalties in response to the
  utility's pervasive and longstanding  management and operational
  transgressions.  Specifically, Citizens challenges the Board's  significant
  reduction in the Company's allowed rate of return on equity, claiming that
  (1) the Board  exceeded its authority by imposing the return-on-equity
  penalty in addition to separate statutory  fines for the same offenses; (2)
  the evidence does not support the penalty; and (3) the return on  equity
  and rate of return imposed by the Board results in an unconstitutional
  regulatory taking.  We  reject each of these arguments and thus affirm the
  Board's decision.

 <Page 2>

       The Board's 309-page order resolved two distinct but interrelated
  dockets, the first  addressing substantial allegations of misconduct and
  mismanagement by Citizens, and the second  investigating the Company's
  overall rates.  Following forty-one days of hearings and two separate 
  public hearings, the Board found that Citizens' rates were excessive and
  that the Company had  engaged in a decades-long course of egregious and
  unprecedented misconduct characterized by (1)  numerous willful violations
  of statutes, Board orders, and its own agreements; (2) imprudent 
  mismanagement of its Vermont Electric Division (VED); (3) imprudent failure
  to maintain accurate  records to ensure that only appropriate costs were
  included in rates; (4) willful failure to provide  service to its Vermont
  customers through least-cost options; and (5) persistent refusal to
  cooperate  with regulatory investigations.

       The Board cited examples of Citizens' misconduct too numerous to set
  forth in any detail.   Suffice it to say that the Board's decision is
  replete with examples of inadequate and misleading  accounting practices on
  the part of Citizens that obscured the true nature of the Company's 
  expenditures and activities.  Citizens failed to implement procedures
  designed to promote  compliance with demand-side-management (DSM)
  obligations, and, in some instances, claimed  savings for DSM programs that
  appeared never to have been implemented.  The Company also  failed to abide
  by its agreement to implement least-cost planning for transmission and
  distribution  facilities, and further failed to conduct required least-cost
  analysis before undertaking major  investments.  Moreover, Citizens
  repeatedly failed to obtain prior board approval, as required by  statute,
  before engaging in significant projects, including the conversion of
  distribution lines to  transmission lines, the relocation or modification
  of substations, and the construction of new lines  and substations. 
  Citizens compounded its misconduct by resisting the Department's efforts to 

 <Page 3>

  obtain information from the Company.  In short, over a period of many
  years, Citizens engaged in a  pattern of behavior aimed at thwarting the
  Department's and the Board's regulatory oversight. 

       Based on these findings, the Board concluded that Citizens' operation
  of VED was  imprudent and failed to promote the general good of the State
  of Vermont.  In the Board's view,  Citizens' pattern of misconduct, its
  failure to comply with statutory law and regulatory directives,  and its
  disdain for accepted principles of utility accounting and management
  justified imposition of  the harshest penalty available - revocation of the
  utility's certificate of public good.

       The Board determined, however, that immediate revocation of Citizens'
  franchise would not  be the most effective or expedient method to achieve
  the ultimate goal of providing Citizens'  Vermont ratepayers with the most
  reliable, reasonably priced energy services available.  Citing the 
  transaction costs and unintended consequences that would follow a
  revocation decision, and noting  Citizens' professed desire to reform its
  operations, the Board decided against the recommendation of  the Department
  of Public Service to revoke Citizens' franchise, and instead elected to
  impose a  variety of other penalties aimed at ensuring that the Company
  would follow through on its  commitment to reform.  The Board ordered an
  immediate reduction of Citizens' rates, fined Citizens  $60,000 for
  specific statutory violations, imposed a five-year probationary period on
  the Company,  and reduced Citizens' authorized rate of return on equity 525
  basis points from 10.50 percent to 5.25  percent.  

       The Board  stated three independent grounds for its decision to cut
  Citizens' return on equity  in half.  First, the Board decided that it was
  appropriate to split the overall cost of equity capital  evenly between the
  ratepayers, who will continue to benefit from Citizens' operations, and the 
  Company's investors, who are ultimately responsible for Citizens'
  inadequacies.  Second, the Board 

 <Page 4>

  found it just and reasonable that Citizens' shareholders receive a return
  roughly equivalent to the  returns earned by ordinary ratepayers on
  passbook savings or certificates of deposit accounts.   Third, the Board
  reasoned that Citizens' history of violations demonstrated that a very
  significant  equity reduction in Vermont would be necessary to focus the
  Company's attention on its  management problems and to provide the
  necessary incentive for the Company to permanently alter  its unacceptable
  pattern of misconduct.

       The Board emphasized that the return-on-equity penalty it was imposing
  was "just and  absolutely necessary" to prevent a recurrence of the type of
  conduct Citizens had engaged in.  The  Board found it apparent that a less
  harsh penalty would not have the desired effect.  Noting that the  evidence
  supported revocation of Citizens' franchise, the Board made it clear that
  it was willing to  give Citizens another opportunity to improve its
  performance only under circumstances that reflect  the seriousness of the
  Company's past violations.  The Board ordered the return-on-equity penalty
  to  remain in effect until Citizens demonstrated that it had corrected the
  problems that led to the  violations, and that it was delivering
  energy-efficient services to its clients.  Finally, the Board  stressed
  that the 525-basis-point reduction in return on equity would not materially
  affect the  financial security of Citizens as a corporate entity. 
  According to the Board, the penalty would not  impact the ability of
  Citizens to raise the capital necessary to continue the level of service
  required  of it in Vermont or elsewhere.	

       On appeal, Citizens challenges only the return-on-equity penalty,
  contending that the Board  exceeded its authority in imposing that penalty
  in addition to the statutory fines, and further that the  penalty is
  unsupported by the evidence and is so excessive that it is
  unconstitutionally confiscatory.

 <Page 5>

                          I. The Standard of Review

       We apply a deferential standard of review in appeals from the Public
  Service Board.  In re  Green Mountain Power Corp., 162 Vt. 378, 380, 648
  A.2d 374, 376 (1994).  As long as the Board's  decisions are directed at
  proper regulatory objectives, they "enjoy a strong presumption of validity" 
  and "'are subject to great deference in this Court.'"  Id. (quoting In re
  Green Mountain Power Corp.,  142 Vt. 373, 380, 455 A.2d 823, 825 (1983)). 
  We accept the Board's findings and conclusions  unless the appealing party
  demonstrates that they are clearly erroneous, and, in reviewing those 
  findings and conclusions, we defer to the Board's particular expertise and
  informed judgment.  Id.   at 380, 648 A.2d at 376; In re East Georgia
  Cogeneration Ltd. P'ship, 158 Vt. 525, 531-32, 614 A.2d  799, 803 (1992).

                          II. The Board's Authority

       Citizens first argues that the Board exceeded its authority by
  imposing a return-on-equity  penalty for the same conduct upon which its
  statutory fines were based.  Citizens asserts that, where  the Legislature
  has specifically prescribed penalties for statutory violations, the Board
  may not  increase the specified fines by imposing an additional monetary
  penalty in the form of a reduction in  return on equity.  In its reply
  brief, Citizens concedes that some part of the Board's return-on-equity 
  penalty was imposed for management deficiencies not subject to specified
  statutory fines, and  further that the Board has the authority to adjust a
  utility's return on equity to take into account  management deficiencies;
  however, according to Citizens, the Board may not go beyond the limited 
  penalty set by the Legislature for specific violations by adding a
  return-on-equity penalty for the  same conduct.

       Section 30 of Title 30 authorizes the Board to impose specified
  monetary fines on utilities 

 <Page 6>

  for certain misconduct, including (1) refusing to open their books or
  provide lawfully required  documents to the Board or the Department, (2)
  failing to obey a Board order, or (3) willfully  hindering, obstructing or
  delaying the fulfillment of the duties imposed upon them by the Board.  At 
  the time that Citizens began to engage in the conduct for which it was
  penalized, the maximum fine  under § 30 for each particular violation was
  $5000. (FN1) In this case, the Board cited twelve  separate violations of
  regulatory requirements - most of which concerned Citizens' willful failure
  to  comply with Board orders or obtain necessary permits for its activities
  - and imposed a $5000 fine  for each of those violations.

       The Board indicated that the total civil fine of $60,000 was small in
  light of Citizens' pattern  of willful transgressions, but declined to
  impose specific fines for each of the many more acts  identified in the
  proceeding that may have constituted separate statutory violations. 
  Instead, the  Board elected to impose a return-on-equity penalty based on
  the seriousness and the sheer number  of the violations.  The Board
  emphasized that the return-on-equity reduction related to the pattern of 
  repeated, willful violations of permitting requirements, and the pervasive
  management failures and  operational deficiencies that supported this
  pattern of unlawful behavior.  The Board determined  that the
  return-on-equity penalty was necessary to ensure that Citizens fulfilled
  its obligation to  operate efficiently, provide quality service, and comply
  with applicable legal standards.

       We conclude that the Board was not limited to the relatively meager
  statutory fines for  individual violations in responding to Citizens'
  systemic mismanagement and willful defiance of 

 <Page 7>

  the Board's authority.  In rate cases, the Board has the authority, among
  other things, to impose new  rates, to require changes in a utility's
  practices "relating to its service," and to make such orders "as  will
  compel the furnishing of such adequate service as shall . . . be found by
  it to be just and  reasonable."  30 V.S.A. § 218(a); see also id. § 219
  ("Each company subject to supervision under  this chapter shall be required
  to furnish reasonably adequate service.").  We have described the 
  statutory basis of the Board's regulatory authority as "extremely broad and
  unconfining with respect  to means and methods available to that body to
  achieve the stated goal of adequate service at just  and reasonable rates." 
  Green Mountain Power Corp., 142 Vt. at 380, 455 A.2d at 825.

       Citizens cites several out-of-state cases to bolster its argument that
  the Board lacked the  authority to impose both statutory fines and a
  return-on-equity penalty for its transgressions.  Only  one of these cases
  even vaguely supports the Company's "double-penalty" argument, however. 
  See  South Central Bell v. Utility Reg. Comm'n, 637 S.W.2d 649, 653 (Ky.
  1982) (citing statutory  provisions that allow imposition of criminal
  penalties for specified violations, court concluded that  "the General
  Assembly omitted a specific provision allowing the Commission to enforce
  service  cases by a reduction in a rate case").  Moreover, in each of the
  cases cited by Citizens, the courts  took the position, based on an
  analysis of the particular state statutory law then in place, that the 
  adequacy of a utility's service may not be considered in determining the
  utility's rate of return.  See  Florida Tel. Corp. v. Carter, 70 So. 2d
  508, 510 (Fla. 1954) ("We find no authority vested in the  Commission to
  make any orders in a rate-making proceeding with reference to inadequate 
  service."); Village of Apple River v. Illinois Commerce Comm'n, 165 N.E.2d
  329, 332 (Ill. 1960)  ("[A]lthough the approval of proposed rate increases
  is necessarily related to the services offered, a  rate that is otherwise
  just and reasonable may be a necessary condition precedent to adequate 

 <Page 8>

  service."); South Central Bell, 637 S.W.2d at 652-53 ("[R]ates and service
  are two distinct areas  and, therefore, are subject to separate procedures,
  standards and remedies. . . . [T]he quality of  service is not germane to
  the normal, time-tested factors that go into the determination of a proper 
  rate for the services rendered by a utility."); Elyria Tel. Co. v. Public
  Utilities Comm'n, 110 N.E.2d  59, 62 (Ohio 1953) ("Nowhere in the statutes
  can we find authority on the part of the commission to  condition an
  increase in rates, under such circumstances, on an improvement of
  service.").

       In this respect, these cases are directly contrary to longstanding
  Vermont law authorizing the  Board to consider management efficiency and
  customer service in arriving at a determination of just  and reasonable
  rates.  See In re Young's Community TV Corp., 141 Vt. 53, 57, 442 A.2d
  1311,  1313 (1982) (Board acted within its discretion in reducing company's
  rate of return based on poor  service); Arlington Selectmen v. Arlington
  Water Co., 136 Vt. 495, 498, 394 A.2d 1130, 1131  (1978) (this Court has
  accepted general proposition that reasonable service is tied to statutory 
  requirement of reasonable rates); In re New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 115
  Vt. 494, 513, 66 A.2d  135, 147 (1949) ("A utility must be efficiently and
  economically managed and operated as a  condition to the exercise of its
  right to impose rates adequate to cover the full cost of service and  thus
  satisfy the investor requirement.").  Like Vermont, most other
  jurisdictions now accept the  general principle that rates may be adjusted
  depending on the adequacy of the utility's service and  the efficiency of
  its management.  See US West Communications, Inc. v. Washington Utilities
  and  Transp. Comm'n, 949 P.2d 1337, 1361 (Wash. 1997) (citing cases for
  proposition that regulatory  agency may consider quality of service or
  efficiency of management in setting fair and reasonable  rate of return).

       In US West, the Washington Supreme Court examined statutory provisions
  comparable to 

 <Page 9>

  those in Vermont and held that they "must be construed together to
  accomplish the purpose of  assuring the public of adequate service at fair
  and reasonable rates."  Id. at 1359; see State ex rel.  Utilities Comm'n v.
  General Tel. Co., 208 S.E.2d 681, 687 (N.C. 1974) (provisions of public 
  utilities statute constitute single integrated plan that must be construed
  together to accomplish  primary purpose of assuring that public is provided
  adequate service at reasonable charge).  The  court concluded that nothing
  in the provisions allowing the commission to impose penalties for 
  statutory violations "indicates they are the exclusive response the
  Commission may make to poor  service by a public service company," and
  further that the statutory provision pertaining to the  setting of just and
  reasonable rates did not require the commission to resort to the penalty
  provisions  in considering inadequate service when setting rates.  US West,
  949 P.2d at 1359; see Gulf Power  Co. v. Wilson, 597 So. 2d 270, 273 (Fla.
  1992) (rejecting utility's assertion that commission could  impose only
  those penalties expressly authorized by statute).  Rather, according to the
  court,  statutory law allowed the commission to consider poor service when
  setting rates.  US West, 949  P.2d at 1359.  The same is true in Vermont.

       We also find unpersuasive Citizens' related election-of-remedies
  argument - that the Board  exceeded its authority by imposing both
  statutory fines and a return-on-equity penalty for the same  conduct.  This
  argument is based on only one of the three alternative grounds for the
  Board's  decision to impose a return-on-equity penalty.  That alternative
  ground attempted to assign basis-point reductions to the various actions
  or deficiencies underlying the penalty.  Citizens alleges that a  number of
  these rate-of-return penalty assignments - imposed for the Company's
  pattern of  extensive violations of permitting requirements, for its
  failure to abide by an express agreement  contained in a Board order, for
  its failure to perform a least-cost analysis prior to construction, and 

 <Page 10>

  for its failure to deliver adequate energy-efficiency services - are based
  on the same conduct or  deficiency for which the Board levied a specific
  civil fine.  Analogizing to double jeopardy, but  acknowledging that the
  question is one of legislative intent, Citizens argues that the Board
  cannot  levy such double penalties for the same actions or deficiencies.

       We do not agree with either Citizens' legal argument or the factual
  basis upon which it rests.  Regarding the legal argument, we stress that
  the purpose of a rate-of-return reduction is not to  penalize a company for
  specific acts of misconduct, but rather to set reasonable rates in cases
  where  the consumers are not being adequately served "due to inefficiency
  or improvidence or other like  reasons."  New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 115
  Vt. at 513, 66 A.2d at 147.  Consistent with that  standard, the Board
  imposed its rate-of-return penalty for "a pattern of mismanagement and
  willful  failure to abide by Vermont laws and regulations that stretches
  over many years."  Because of  Citizens' mismanagement and failure to
  comply with the law, the Board could not determine  whether ratepayers were
  receiving adequate service, and at a reasonable rate, and whether there was 
  harm to Vermont's environment.  The Board specifically chose a
  rate-of-return penalty that would  send a message to shareholders "that
  such corporate irresponsibility will no longer be tolerated."   Thus, the
  Board's purpose for imposing the rate-of-return reduction was distinct
  from, and extended  beyond, the purpose of the statutory fines to punish
  Citizens for individual infractions.

       In view of the different purposes behind the remedies imposed by the
  Board, we find no  support for Citizens' general argument that the
  statutory fines and the rate-of-return penalty cannot  coexist when the
  factual bases for the two sanctions overlap.  Public remedies are
  frequently  cumulative as necessary to protect the public interest.  See,
  e.g., United States v. Forest Dale, Inc.,  818 F. Supp. 954, 967 (N.D. Tex.
  1993) (double recovery is not involved when there is civil action 

 <Page 11>

  seeking damages and criminal action seeking imposition of fines "to deter
  future acts of  discrimination"); People v. Purinton, 137 N.Y.S.2d 296, 299
  (Sup. Ct. 1954) (legislature may  provide concurrent remedies for
  enforcement of statutes by means of civil penalties and criminal 
  prosecution); Personal Service Ins. Co. v. Mamone, 489 N.E.2d 785, 788
  (Ohio 1986) (statutory  enforcement remedies accorded to state agency "are
  cumulative and not mutually exclusive").  In  this case, there is no
  indication that the Legislature intended to preclude the Board from
  applying  the available remedies cumulatively under appropriate
  circumstances.

       Even if we agreed with Citizens' legal argument, it would not support
  striking either the rate-of-return reduction or the civil fines in this
  case.  As the Board stressed in its reconsideration  decision, the
  rate-of-return penalty was for "pervasive management and operational
  deficiencies of  the Company," not specific acts of misconduct.  Thus, even
  if, as Citizens does, we look solely at  the Board's itemization of
  component parts of the rate-of-return penalty - which, as noted, was only 
  one of three alternative rationales provided for the penalty level chosen - 
  we believe that the Board  has adequately distinguished the conduct for
  which the rate-of-return penalty was imposed from the  conduct underlying
  the fines.  For example, with respect to the Company's failure to abide by
  permit  requirements, the Board stated that "the return on equity reduction
  ordered here relates to the  company's pattern of repeated, willful
  violations of permitting requirements, the management  failures that
  support this pattern, and the continuing failure to train and supervise
  Vermont  operational personnel."  This conclusion is supported by the fact
  that the Board did not attempt to  levy fines for each violation of § 30,
  leaving many violations shown by the evidence to be lumped  into its
  finding of a pattern of improper conduct.

 <Page 12>

                    III. The Sufficiency of the Evidence

       Next, Citizens argues that, even if the Board has the statutory
  authority to impose a rate-of-return penalty when a separate penalty
  exists under the statute, the Board's 525-basis-point return-on-equity
  penalty was not supported by sufficient evidence.  In Citizens' view, the
  Board failed to  make findings to support its return-on-equity penalty, and
  the evidence in the record did not support  the penalty because no party
  ever proposed the basis-point reduction in return on equity ultimately 
  arrived at by the Board.  We find no merit to either assertion.

       At the hearing, the Department recommended revocation of Citizens'
  franchise or, in the  alternative, a combination of penalties that would
  act as a strong deterrent to future  mismanagement.  The Department's
  expert identified over one dozen separate and distinct acts of  misdeeds,
  imprudence, and mismanagement on the part of Citizens that warranted the
  imposition of  penalties in the form of a reduction in return on equity. 
  The expert testified that several of the  violations involved aggravating
  circumstances because of their pervasive or willful nature, or  because
  they constituted a serious breach of public trust.  Noting that
  100-basis-point reductions in  return on equity had commonly been imposed
  for individual or related imprudent acts, the expert  testified that
  concurrent return-on-equity penalties were not appropriate in this case,
  given the  seriousness, the pervasiveness, the number, and the variety of
  the misdeeds.  While ultimately  recommending a 300-basis-point reduction
  in return on equity, the expert testified that each of the  three most
  serious violations warranted separate 100-basis-point reductions, and that
  the other  violations warranted no less than75-basis-point reductions.

       Citizens did not dispute this testimony, but rather its expert took
  the position that a 300-basis-point reduction in return on equity would be
  confiscatory.  The expert conceded that it was 

 <Page 13>

  standard policy to impose a return-on-equity penalty on a utility that had
  gone astray, and further  opined that the Board could impose penalties that
  would be painful but still allow the Company to  survive.  The expert
  concluded, however, that the return-on-equity penalty proposed by the 
  Department was excessive.  When asked why, the expert testified only that
  electric utilities were  currently being allowed levels of equity returns
  at and sometimes above eleven percent, and that the  penalty proposed by
  the Department would limit Citizens' return on equity to below seven and
  one-half percent.

       The Board concluded that a substantial reduction in Citizens' allowed
  return on equity was  required because of the pervasiveness and seriousness
  of the numerous violations, which could have  negative consequences for the
  ratepayers and the environment.  The Board recognized that a 525-
  basis-point reduction was large in comparison to penalties that it had
  adopted in other proceedings,  but it noted that the violations in the
  other proceedings paled in comparison to the widespread and  longstanding
  violations found in this case.  As discussed above, the Board then itemized
  three  independent grounds for its decision to cut Citizens' return on
  equity in half and concluded this  penalty was  "just and absolutely
  necessary" to prevent a recurrence of the type of conduct Citizens  had
  engaged in.

       We agree with the Board's statement in its reconsideration order that
  the remedy it imposed  lies well within the range of outcomes supported by
  competent testimony presented at the hearing.   The Department may have
  recommended an overall 300-basis-point reduction in return on equity,  but
  the testimony of its expert supported the Board's imposition of even a
  higher return-on-equity  penalty than the one ultimately arrived at by the
  Board.  See In re Green Mountain Power Corp., 131 

 <Page 14>

  Vt. 284, 305, 305 A.2d 571, 584 (1973) (Board's weighing of evidence will
  be sustained as long as  there is evidence to support it); see also In re
  Petition of Twenty-Four Utilities, 159 Vt. 339, 348,  618 A.2d 1295,
  1300-01 (1992) (rate of return is not subject to precise measurement and
  therefore  calls for Board's expert judgment); In re Central Vermont Public
  Serv. Corp., 141 Vt. 284, 288, 449  A.2d 904, 906-07 (1982) (complexities
  of utility regulation place added premium upon Board's  expertise in
  ratemaking; Board's determination of just and reasonable rates is plainly
  within this  sphere of broad judicial deference).  The Board's detailed and
  unchallenged explanation of why it  was imposing the 525-basis-point
  penalty is sufficient to support its decision.  See James C..  Bonbright,
  Albert L. Danielsen, & David R. Kamerschen, Principles of Public Utility
  Rates, 205 (2d  ed. 1988) (fair rate of return is one that enables utility
  to attract capital but that discourages  inefficient management); cf.
  Mountain Fuel Supply v. Public Serv. Comm'n, 861 P.2d 414, 428  (Utah 1993)
  (although it may be difficult to articulate why a particular decrease in
  rate of return is  more appropriate than another as method to prompt
  utility to correct mismanagement or  inefficiency, commission must provide
  some rationale for its choice). 



       We specifically reject Citizens' argument that the Board is limited to
  imposing a penalty that  was supported by some expert witness.  Citizens
  argues this point from our precedents requiring  that Board orders be
  supported by findings, which are in turn supported by evidence.  See In re 
  Petition of Burlington Elec. Light Dep't, 149 Vt. 300, 303-04, 542 A.2d
  294, 296 (1988).  We can  think of few responsibilities of the Board
  involving greater discretion than the setting of a rate-of-return penalty. 
  The evidence must establish the grounds for such a penalty, but ultimately
  the  amount must be based on the seriousness and nature of the grounds, and
  what action is necessary to  prevent reoccurrence.  As long as the Board's
  decision shows a thorough and fair evaluation of the  various relevant
  factors - as it does in this case - it will be upheld.  The Board's
  discretion is 

 <Page 15>

  not  limited to selecting from recommendations made or supported by the
  parties.

       We also reject Citizens' argument that it was not given fair notice
  of, and thus an  opportunity to respond to, the possible magnitude of the
  rate-of-return penalty.  Once the  Department sought such a penalty,
  Citizens knew that this remedy was in issue and had the  opportunity to
  respond to the Department's recommendation and to propose an alternative
  amount.   In fact, Citizens did both in this case.  Citizens was not
  entitled to an advance decision by the Board - a decision that had to be
  based on a careful evaluation of all of the evidence - in order to know 
  what evidence to present to affect that decision.


          IV. The Constitutionality of the Return-on-Equity Penalty

       Lastly, Citizens argues that the return on equity and overall rate of
  return set by the Board is  confiscatory and therefore unconstitutional. 
  In the first part of this argument, Citizens contends that  the Board was
  obligated, but failed, to evaluate the impact that its equity-reduction
  penalty would  have on the ability of Vermont Electric Division (VED), as
  opposed to the Company as a whole, to  maintain its financial integrity,
  attract capital, and compensate investors for risks assumed.  This 
  argument fails for at least two reasons.
  
       First, the argument is, for the most part, inconsistent with the
  position Citizens took in the  proceedings before the Board.  Citizens
  neither introduced evidence to support any rate-of-return  analysis of VED
  as a stand-alone entity,  nor even suggested that such an analysis was
  required until  after the Board rendered its decision.  In contending that
  the return-on-equity penalty urged by the  Department was confiscatory,
  Citizens' expert asked the Board to consider the capital structure of 
  Citizens, not VED.   In his testimony, the expert consistently referred to
  "the Company" and failed  to make any distinction between VED and the
  Company as a whole.   Further, in its proposal for 

 <Page 16>

  a decision, Citizens stated that "confiscatory rates are those that would
  impinge on Citizens' ability  to raise capital."  (Emphasis added.).

       As noted, in its initial decision, the Board determined that its
  return-on-equity penalty would  not materially impact the financial
  security of Citizens as a corporate entity.  Citizens briefly  "suggested"
  in its motion for reconsideration, without elaboration or citation to legal
  authority, that  it is impermissible for the Board to set rates for VED
  based on the fact that a large penalty was  necessary to focus Citizens'
  attention on VED's problems.  Citizens offered no evidence or  allegations
  regarding the actual impact of the penalty on VED, nor did the Company
  request a  hearing on that issue.  The Board responded by noting that
  Citizens failed to explain why it was  inappropriate to consider the
  financial impact on the Company as a whole, and by concluding that  the
  return-on-equity penalty would not imperil VED's ability to attract
  capital.  Indeed, the Board  surmised that the substantial penalty would
  compel Citizens to address VED's management  problems and thereby enhance
  VED's ability to attract resources from within the Company.  Based  on
  these facts, we conclude that Citizens effectively waived its argument that
  the Board erred by  considering the financial impact on the Company as a
  whole rather than on VED as a stand-alone  entity.  See Petition of
  Twenty-Four Vt. Utilities, 159 Vt. at 352-53, 618 A.2d at 1303.

       Second, even assuming that the argument was adequately raised and
  briefed before the  Board, we find it lacking in merit on this very sparse
  record.  In this case, the Board expressed  doubt about Citizens'
  suggestion that, in certain respects, VED operated as a stand-alone entity.  
  After all, Citizens, not VED, is the entity that attracts outside capital
  and compensates investors.  As  the Board indicated in its reconsideration
  order, VED attracts capital only in the intra-corporate  arena, and thus
  the return-on-equity penalty should encourage the Company to direct more
  resources 

 <Page 17>

  to VED.  Further, the Board found that the numerous transgressions
  identified in this proceeding  resulted from mismanagement both in Vermont
  and in out-of-state headquarters, and that Citizens'  officers and its
  corporate structure were responsible for the pattern of misbehavior that
  prompted the  Board's imposition of substantial penalties.

       The only case cited by Citizens in support of its argument that the
  Board should not have  considered the financial impact of its rates on the
  company as a whole is an 1898 United States  Supreme Court case that did
  not concern a rate-of-return penalty arising from a utility's imprudence 
  or mismanagement.  See Smyth v. Ames, 169 U.S. 466, 541 (1898) ("The State
  cannot justify  unreasonably low rates for domestic transportation,
  considered alone, upon the ground that the  carrier is earning large
  profits on its interstate business, over which, so far as rates are
  concerned,  the State has no control.").  As discussed above, modern courts
  and commentators generally agree  that regulatory agencies may impose rates
  that punish managerial inefficiency and provide an  incentive for
  improvement.  See, e.g., Mountain Fuel Supply, 861 P.2d at 427 (regulatory 
  commission may reduce rate of return as method to prompt utility to correct
  mismanagement and  inefficiency without offending standard established by
  Supreme Court); Bonbright et al., supra, at  205 (in determining fair rate
  of return, regulatory commissions may consider effect rates will have  not
  only on allowing public utility to secure capital to provide service but
  also on stimulating  managerial efficiency).  Here, the Board found that
  its return-on-equity penalty was absolutely  necessary to focus the
  company's attention on its operational deficiencies and to prevent a 
  recurrence of past problems.

       In the second part of its constitutional argument, Citizens contends
  that the Board violated  the standard set forth in Supreme Court cases by
  imposing a return on equity below any range of 

 <Page 18>

  reasonableness.  We conclude that Citizens has failed to meet its burden of
  demonstrating that the  rates imposed by the Board are so low as to be
  confiscatory and thus unconstitutional.

       The fundamental considerations in determining just and reasonable
  rates were set forth by  the United States Supreme Court nearly eighty
  years ago:

    A public utility is entitled to such rates as will permit it to
    earn a  return on the value of the property which it employs for
    the  convenience of the public equal to that generally being made
    at the  same time and in the same general part of the country on
    investments  in other business undertakings which are attended by
    corresponding  risks and uncertainties; but it has no
    constitutional right to profits  such as are realized or
    anticipated in highly profitable enterprises or  speculative
    ventures.  The return should be reasonably sufficient to  assure
    confidence in the financial soundness of the utility and should 
    be adequate, under efficient and economical management, to 
    maintain and support its credit and enable it to raise the money 
    necessary for the proper discharge of its public duties.

  Bluefield Water Works & Improvement Co. v. Public Serv. Comm'n, 262 U.S.
  679, 692-93 (1923)  (emphasis added); see In re Petition of Village of
  Hardwick Elec. Dep't, 143 Vt. 437, 442, 466 A.2d  1180, 1182 (1983)
  (quoting and following Bluefield standard).

       Bluefield, however, did not concern a review of rates reduced for
  imprudence or  mismanagement.  Commentators and courts have acknowledged
  since Bluefield that a utility is not  entitled to the same rate of return
  irrespective of the efficiency of the utility's management or the  adequacy
  of its service.  See Richard J. Pierce, Jr. & Ernest Gellhorn, Regulated
  Industries, 134-35  (3d ed. 1994) ("The phrase 'under efficient and
  economical management' [in Bluefield] is an  important qualification.  If
  an agency finds that a firm is not being managed efficiently and 
  economically, it can lower the firm's allowed rate of return below the
  level otherwise required to  meet the comparable risk test."); Charles F.
  Philips, Jr., The Regulation of Public Utilities, 553 

 <Page 19>

  (1993) ("there is no such thing as a reasonable rate for service that is
  deficient"); see also D.C.  Transit Sys., Inc. v. Washington Metro. Auth.
  Transit Comm'n, 466 F.2d 394, 420-21 (D.C. Cir.  1972) (Bluefield addressed
  adequacy of return "'under efficient and economical management'")  (citing
  Bluefield, 262 U.S. at 693); Arlington Selectmen, 136 Vt. at 498, 394 A.2d
  at 1131 ("we  have accepted . . . [the] general proposition . . . that poor
  service can justify lower rates");  New  England Tel. & Tel. Co., 115 Vt.
  at 513, 66 A.2d at 147 ("A utility must be efficiently and  economically
  managed and operated as a condition to the exercise of its right to impose
  rates  adequate to cover the full cost of service and thus satisfy the
  investor requirement."); In re  Application of General Tel. Co., 652 P.2d
  1200, 1209 (N.M. 1982) (regulatory commission may  consider in rate
  proceeding quality or inadequacy of service in determining what is just and 
  reasonable rate of return to utility); National Utilities, Inc. v.
  Pennsylvania P.U.C., 709 A.2d 972,  979 (Pa. Commw. Ct. 1998) (Fifth and
  Fourteenth Amendments are not violated when public utility  is denied rate
  increase for failing to provide adequate service to public, even if result
  is rate of  return less than utility would otherwise be entitled to
  receive).

       In arriving at a determination of just and reasonable rates, the
  regulatory agency is required  to balance both investor and consumer
  interests.  See Federal Power Comm'n v. Hope Natural Gas.  Co., 320 U.S.
  591, 603 (1944); Petition of Village of Hardwick Elec. Dep't, 143 Vt. at
  443, 466  A.2d at 1183; In re Petition of Public Serv. Co. of N.H., 539
  A.2d 263, 268 (N.H. 1988)  (constitution requires only that regulatory body
  engage in rational process of balancing consumer  and investor interests). 
  Of course, "a fair return to investors is not necessarily fair to
  consumers."   New England Tel. & Tel. Co., 115 Vt. at 513, 66 A.2d at 147;
  see Federal Power Comm'n v.  Natural Gas Pipeline Co., 315 U.S. 575, 607
  (1942) (Black, Douglas, and Murphy, J.J., concurring) 

 <Page 20>

  ("The consumer interest cannot be disregarded in determining what is a
  'just and reasonable' rate.   Conceivably, a return to the company of the
  cost of service might not be 'just and reasonable' to the  public.");
  Pennsylvania Elec. Co. v. Pennsylvania Pub. Util. Comm'n, 502 A.2d 130, 134
  (Pa. 1985)  (legitimate areas of concern noted in Hope are appropriate
  factors to be weighed in balancing  consumer and investor interests, but
  are not, in themselves, controlling); El Paso Elec. Co.  v. Public  Util.
  Comm'n, 917 S.W.2d 846, 862 (Tex. Ct. App. 1995) (end result of balance of
  consumer and  investor interests does not insure that utility will produce
  net revenues).

       Ratemaking necessarily encompasses an evaluation of "the efficiency of
  the public utility's  operations, the adequacy of its service, and the
  competency of its management."  In re Petition of  Valley Road Sewerage,
  666 A.2d 992, 996 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1995).  Each of these factors 
  must be considered when determining whether rates are just and reasonable
  under constitutional and  statutory standards.  See id. at 995-96.  Hence,
  "rate levels are not offensive to constitutional and  statutory standards
  merely because they fix returns at a lower scale for inefficient
  operators."  Id. at   995; see D.C. Transit Sys., Inc., 466 F.2d at 419
  (utility's fulfillment of its service commitments is  sine qua non to
  constitutional protection under confiscation principles; inefficiency and
  inferior  service deserve less return than would normally be forthcoming).

       Accordingly, we reject Citizens' suggestion that it is entitled to a
  certain level of return no  matter how egregious its mismanagement or
  inadequate its service.  See Petition of Valley Road  Sewerage, 666 A.2d at
  996.  If we were to accept this notion, it would, in effect, permit
  Citizens to  disregard its public obligations and yet insist upon rates
  that guarantee its continued financial  integrity.  See D.C. Transit Sys.,
  Inc., 466 F.2d at 422.  As demonstrated by the case law cited  above, the
  Constitution does not compel such a result.  See id. at 423 (constitution
  neither

 <Page 21>

  guarantees public utility immunity from loss occasioned by mismanagement,
  nor bars regulatory  agency from taking adequate steps to protect public
  from such mismanagement, even if short-term  effect is temporary loss to
  utility); State ex rel. Utilities Comm'n, 208 S.E.2d at 687 (commission is 
  not required to fix rates without regard to quality of service, thereby
  guaranteeing "fair" rate of  return to "complacent monopoly" that persists
  in rendering mediocre service and defying  commission orders).

       On appeal, Citizens has the "heavy burden" of demonstrating that the
  rates imposed by the  Board are unjust and unreasonable.  Hope, 320 U.S. at
  602; see Jersey Cent. Power & Light Co. v.  F.E.R.C., 810 F.2d 1168,
  1175-76 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (under deferential standard established in Hope, 
  "the courts cannot intervene in the absence of a clear showing that the
  limits of due process have  been overstepped").  Our role in reviewing
  Board orders is not to reweigh the Board's balancing of  consumer and
  investor interests in setting rates, but rather to assure ourselves that
  the Board has  given reasoned consideration to both of those interests, and
  to consider whether, given those  interests, the end result of the rate
  order is within a "zone of reasonableness."  In re Permian Basin  Area Rate
  Cases, 390 U.S. 747, 791-92 (1968); Hope, 320 U.S. at 603; see Jersey
  Cent., 810 F.2d at  1191-92 (Starr, J., concurring) (constitution requires
  only that end result reflect reasonable  balancing of interests of
  investors and ratepayers).

       Barring a showing that, given all of the circumstances, the Board's
  order results in unjust  rates, we defer to the Board's decision because it
  "calls for a highly expert judgment" that requires  the balancing of
  considerations that "cannot be cast into a legalistic formula" and thus are
  better left  entrusted to the regulatory agency.  Natural Gas Pipeline Co.,
  315 U.S. at 607 (Black, Douglas, and  Murphy, J.J., concurring); see
  Bonbright et al., supra, at 317 (it is generally accepted that 

 <Page 22>

  commissions may apply their own judgment under deferential test established
  in Hope and its  progeny).  "'If the total effect of the rate order cannot
  be said to be unreasonable, judicial inquiry . . .  is at an end.'"
  Duquesne Light Co. v. Barasch, 488 U.S. 299, 310 (1989) (quoting Hope, 320
  U.S. at  602). 

       We stress that other than claiming broadly that the rate-of-return
  reduction is confiscatory  and therefore unconstitutional, Citizen has made
  virtually no record to support its argument.  Thus,  it has failed to
  recognize, let alone satisfy, its heavy burden.  Cf. US West, 949 P.2d at
  1359 (utility  made no showing that commission's rate decision fell outside
  zone of reasonableness).  Its only  support for the argument that the
  Board's return-on-equity penalty results in unjust and unreasonable  rates
  is: (1) the reduced return on equity imposed by the Board limited the
  Company, at least  temporarily, to the same return obtained by holders of
  passbook savings and certificate-of-deposit  accounts, one of the
  alternative justifications cited by the Board; (2) the penalties imposed in
  this  case are more severe than those imposed in a number of out-of-state
  decisions involving completely  different facts; and (3) an affidavit,
  submitted to the Board as part of the Company's motion for 
  reconsideration, in which a Company accountant states that the Board's
  return-on-equity penalty  will result in reduced revenues of approximately
  $1.5 million annually.  Neither the citations to  distinguishable case law,
  nor the single statement in the affidavit, nor the bald assertion that it
  was  plainly inappropriate for the Board to restrict its rate of return to
  the return generated by passbook  savings accounts - either considered
  separately or together - come close to satisfying the standard  under which
  we may overturn rate decisions.

       In justifying its failure to make a record to support its argument,
  Citizens returns to its claim,  rejected above, that it was denied proper
  notice that such a heavy penalty was contemplated by the

 <Page 23>

  Board.  Even if we were to accept that claim, however, it would not explain
  Citizens' failure to  proffer any evidence before the Board, in connection
  with its motion for reconsideration, to show  the effect of the
  rate-of-return order on the Company or its Vermont Electric Division.  Cf.
  Petition  of Twenty-Four Vermont Utilities, 159 Vt. at 352, 618 A.2d at
  1303 (utility waived issue by failing  to raise it before Board and include
  it in post-judgment motion).  Nor would it explain Citizens'  failure to
  seek an additional hearing to put on additional evidence concerning that
  effect of the rate  order.  In short, Citizens has utterly failed to meet
  its heavy burden of demonstrating that the  Board's rate decision is so
  plainly unreasonable as to be confiscatory and therefore unconstitutional.

       The decisions of the Public Service Board dated June 16, 1997 and
  August 28, 1997 are  affirmed.



                                       FOR THE COURT:


                                       ________________________________________
                                       Associate Justice



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Footnotes


FN1.  Section 30 of Title 30 was substantially amended in 1996.  Among
  other things, the fines  for statutory violations were increased.


