IN_RE_SPRING_BROOK_FARM_FDN.94-332; 164 Vt 282; 671 A.2d 315

[Filed 27-Oct-1995]


       NOTICE:  This opinion is subject to motions for reargument under
  V.R.A.P. 40 as well as formal revision before publication in the Vermont
  Reports.  Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions,
  Vermont Supreme Court, 109 State Street, Montpelier, Vermont 05609-0801 of
  any errors in order that corrections may be made before this opinion goes
  to press.


                                 No. 94-332


 In re Spring Brook Farm                           Supreme Court
    Foundation, Inc.
                                                   On Appeal from
                                                   Environmental Board
 
                                                   February Term, 1995
 

Arthur Gibb, Chair

Stephen R. Crampton and Dennis R. Pearson of Gravel and Shea, Burlington, 
  for appellant

John D. Hansen, Rutland, for appellee

Jeffrey L. Amestoy, Attorney General, and Mary L. Borg, Assistant Attorney 
  General, Montpelier, for amicus State of Vermont


PRESENT:  Allen, C.J., Gibson, Dooley, Morse and Johnson, JJ.

       JOHNSON, J.   Today, we conclude that the exchange element of the
  commercial purpose test for determining Act 250 (10 V.S.A. §§ 6001-6108)
  jurisdiction incorporates projects where a third person pays the provider
  of the facility goods or services for the benefit of another.  Accordingly,
  we affirm the Environmental Board's decision requiring Spring Brook Farm
  Foundation, Inc. (Foundation), a charitable organization, to obtain an Act
  250 land use permit prior to constructing a dormitory/residence hall on a
  44.5-acre tract.

       The Foundation is a New York not-for-profit corporation recognized by
  the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) as a public charitable foundation.  The
  Foundation was formed "to receive and administer funds for scientific,
  educational, and charitable purposes within the meaning of Section
  501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code . . . and in this connection to
  bring underprivileged children to a rural setting."  The Foundation is
  registered to do business in Vermont for the purpose of providing
  inner-city children "the opportunity to visit a working

 <Page 2>

  farm and observe animal husbandry, crop cultivation and harvesting
  and, through this, to expose the children to usable, practical skills in
  farming and related areas."  In 1992, consistent with its stated purpose,
  the Foundation purchased the 569.5-acre Spring Brook Farm from the Vermont
  Land Trust with the intent of establishing its "Farms For City Kids"
  program there.

       Members of the Hagedorn family, the owners of Stern's Miracle-Gro
  Products, Inc., provided most of the initial funding for the Foundation. 
  The president of the Foundation's Board of Directors, James Hagedorn, is
  also the Executive Vice-President of Stern's Miracle-Gro Products. 
  Intending to become self-supporting, the Foundation plans to solicit
  charitable donations from the general public and business community.  The
  Foundation refuses to accept any payments or funds from the students, their
  parents, or the schools involved in the program.

       Because of restrictive covenants governing the farm property, the
  Foundation purchased an adjacent 44.5-acre tract on which it proposes to
  construct a two-story classroom/residence hall containing 5425 square feet. 
  The proposed building is intended to house the children and their teachers
  in six four-person bedrooms, two single bedrooms, and numerous common
  areas.  The building would also serve as a classroom for the program.

       Once in operation, the Foundation expects to bring groups of up to
  twenty students, advertised in the Foundation's promotional literature as
  "Miracle-Gro kids," along with two teachers, to Spring Brook Farm.  The
  students, primarily from grades four to six, will stay at the Farm for one
  to three weeks.  During this time, they will participate in the daily life
  on the Farm, learning about agriculture, forestry and the environment.  The
  program is expected to run up to nine months each year.

       In June 1993, the Foundation requested an advisory opinion from the
  District 2/3 Environmental Commission Coordinator to determine whether the
  proposed classroom/residence hall would be subject to Act 250 jurisdiction. 
  The Coordinator concluded that the project required an Act 250 permit, and
  the Foundation appealed to the Environmental Board.  The Board also
  concluded that the project triggered Act 250 jurisdiction.  It reasoned
  that the project

 <Page 3>

  was a development because it was a construction of improvements on a
  tract of land involving more than ten acres for a commercial purpose.  See
  10 V.S.A. § 6001(3).  The Board concluded that the commercial purpose test
  was satisfied, within the language of Board Rules 2(L) and 2(M), because
  the Foundation would provide facilities to the students in exchange for
  contributions and donations by third parties.  The Foundation appeals.

       Vermont's land use law, Act 250, requires a permit prior to the
  commencement of any development.  10 V.S.A. § 6081(a).  A development
  includes the construction of improvements on a tract of land involving more
  than ten acres for commercial or industrial purposes.  Id. § 6001(3).  The
  Board has defined "commercial purpose" as "the provision of facilities,
  goods or services by a person other than for a municipal or state purpose
  to others in exchange for payment of a purchase price, fee, contribution,
  donation or other object having value." Environmental Board Rule 2(L).  The
  Board includes a commercial dwelling within the concept of a commercial or
  industrial purpose.  Id. 2(A)(2).  A "commercial dwelling" is

  any building or structure or part thereof, including but not limited
  to . . . dormitories and other places for the accommodation of people, that
  is intended to be used and occupied for human habitation on a temporary or
  intermittent basis, in exchange for payment of a fee, contribution,
  donation or other object having value.

  Id. 2(M).  These Board Rules were ratified by the Legislature in 1985;
  therefore, they have the same force and effect as any other law passed by
  the Legislature.  1985, No. 52, § 5; In re Spencer, 152 Vt. 330, 336, 566
  A.2d 959, 962 (1989).

       On appeal, we will defer to the Board's interpretation of Act 250 and
  its own duly promulgated rules, unless there is a compelling indication of
  error.  In re BHL Corp., 161 Vt. 487, 490, 641 A.2d 771, 773 (1994). 
  Indeed, the Board's application of Act 250 to a specific project is
  entitled to a presumption of validity.  In re Burlington Hous. Auth., 143
  Vt. 80, 83, 463 A.2d 215, 217 (1983).

       The central issue in this case is whether Rules 2(L) and 2(M) require
  a direct exchange between a provider and recipient of services.  Because
  the rules have been ratified by the

 <Page 4>

       Legislature, we must follow the rules of statutory interpretation.(FN1)
  The primary goal in construing a statute is to effectuate the intent of the
  Legislature; and we will presume the Legislature intended the plain meaning
  of the statute.  Bisson v. Ward, 160 Vt. 343, 348, 628 A.2d 1256, 1260
  (1993).  "[W]hen the meaning of a statute is plain and unambiguous on its
  face, it must be enforced according to its express terms."  In re
  Burlington Hous. Auth., 143 Vt. at 83, 463 A.2d at 217.

       The plain language of the definition of "commercial purpose" in Rule
  2(L) includes the Foundation's program.  The elements of the rule require:
  (1) the provision of facilities, goods or services, (2) by a person, (3)
  other than for a municipal or state purpose, (4) to others, (5) in exchange
  for, (6) payments of a purchase price, fee, contribution, donation or other
  object having value.  All of these elements are satisfied.  The
  classroom/residence hall is provided by the Foundation (not for municipal
  or state purposes) to underprivileged children in exchange for donations
  and contributions.

       Similarly, the plain language of the definition of "commercial
  dwelling" in Rule 2(M) also includes the Foundation's program.  The
  elements of Rule 2(M) require: (1) any building or structure or part
  thereof, (2) intended for human habitation, (3) on a temporary or
  intermittent basis, (4) in exchange for, (5) payment of a fee,
  contribution, donation, or other object having value.  The
  classroom/residence hall is intended for the children and their teachers
  during their one-to-three-week stay in exchange for donations and
  contributions.

       The Foundation argues that the "in exchange for" element in both
  definitions is not satisfied because the beneficiaries of the facility --
  the underprivileged children -- do not provide the payment.  In essence,
  the Foundation claims the definition implies the requirement of a direct
  exchange.  We disagree.  Nothing in the statute or the policy of Act 250
  mandates a direct

 <Page 5>

  exchange.

       The language of the definitions -- specifically, the words "donation"
  and "contribution" -- implies that the drafters did not intend to require
  a direct exchange.   Donations and contributions convey the concept of
  giving; "a person cannot be required to give a donation in exchange for
  some consideration [because] by its very definition a gift is a voluntary
  transfer without consideration."  In re Baptist Fellowship of Randolph,
  Inc., 144 Vt. 636, 639, 481 A.2d 1274, 1276 (1984).  Any direct exchange
  requirement would impermissibly render these terms superfluous.  Trombley
  v. Bellows Falls Union High Sch., 160 Vt. 101, 104, 624 A.2d 857, 860
  (1993); Baptist Fellowship, 144 Vt. at 639, 481 A.2d at 1276 .

       Moreover, the plain meaning is consistent with the purpose of the
  statute, its subject matter, its effects and consequences, and the reason
  and spirit of the law.  Nash v. Warren Zoning Bd. of Adjustment, 153 Vt.
  108, 112, 569 A.2d 447, 450 (1989).  The purpose of Act 250 is "to protect
  and conserve the lands and the environment of the state and to insure that
  these lands and environment are devoted to uses which are not detrimental
  to the public welfare and interests."  1969, No. 250 (Adj. Sess.), § 1. 
  The Act requires a focus on the impact of the land use, not the nature of
  the institutional activity.  Baptist Fellowship, 144 Vt. at 639, 481 A.2d
  at 1276; see In re BHL Corp., 161 Vt. at 490-91, 641 A.2d at 773 (approving
  Board's premise that proper starting point for determining Act 250
  jurisdiction is actual use of land).

       In determining whether activity constitutes a commercial purpose, as
  defined in Rule 2(L), it is important to consider the distinction the
  drafters were trying to make.  Commercial development in relation to land
  use implies regular use by multiple parties.  By using the word "exchange,"
  the Board intended to separate development for use by others from
  development for personal use.  In fact, the definition of "commercial
  purpose" specifically requires that the services be provided "to others."

       It is irrelevant whether the funding is derived from the actual
  beneficiary of the project or a third party because such distinctions do
  not affect land use.  The Legislature apparently

 <Page 6>

  recognized that funding distinctions were irrelevant to land use. 
  Notably, while certain land uses are specifically exempt from Act 250
  jurisdiction, nonprofit uses are not so excluded.  Baptist Fellowship, 144
  Vt. at 640, 481 A.2d at 1276; 10 V.S.A. § 6001(3).  To permit the
  distinction of profit versus nonprofit, or payment by beneficiary versus
  donation by a third party, to affect application of land use regulations
  would allow charitable organizations, whose projects may substantially
  affect land use, to escape the purview of Act 250 merely because their
  funding is different from other organizations.  See In re Southview
  Assocs., 153 Vt. 171, 175, 569 A.2d 501, 503 (1989) (Court must avoid
  construction that would render statute ineffective or irrational).

       The jurisdictional determination properly focuses on the developer. 
  The definition requires that the developer get something of value in
  exchange for providing the facilities, goods or services.  In considering
  the developer's activity, it is irrelevant whether the payment comes from
  the beneficiary of the facilities, goods, or services or from a third
  party.  All that is required is some sort of exchange between the developer
  and another party.  Similarly, the law of contract formation requires some
  sort of consideration regardless of whether it is provided by the
  beneficiary of the contract or a third party.  See 2 J. Perillo & H.
  Bender, Corbin on Contracts § 5.12 (rev. ed. 1995).

       We conclude that an indirect exchange is sufficient to satisfy the
  commercial purpose test of Rule 2(L) -- that is, it is not necessary that
  the person providing the payment be the person who receives the benefit
  from the facility or service.  The crucial element of the commercial
  purpose test for determining Act 250 jurisdiction is whether the developer
  provides goods or facilities to others in exchange for something of value. 
  In this case, the Foundation will provide a facility to underprivileged
  children in exchange for donations and contributions.

       Application of the commercial purpose test in this case is entirely
  consistent with previous applications of the test.  In BHL Corp., the
  landowner provided shale to others in exchange for money and use of
  excavation equipment.  161 Vt. at 491, 641 A.2d at 773-74.

 <Page 7>

  In Vermont Agency of Natural Resources v. Duranleau, 159 Vt. 233,
  237-38, 617 A.2d 143, 146 (1992), the landowner provided crushed rock to
  the town in exchange for money and an enlarged business site.  In Baptist
  Fellowship, the church provided a sanctuary to its members in exchange for
  donations.  144 Vt. at 639-40, 481 A.2d at 1276.  In these cases, the
  commercial purpose test was satisfied because the developer received
  something of value in return for providing the goods or facility to others.

       The Foundation contends that our reliance on a de facto exchange in
  Baptist Fellowship mandates a different result.  The Foundation misplaces
  the emphasis of that case.  While many of the contributors actually
  benefitted from the Church's facilities, we specifically noted that the
  church, much like the Foundation, did not require such an exchange. 
  Baptist Fellowship, 144 Vt. at 639, 481 A.2d at 1276.  Moreover, the
  determination of Act 250 jurisdiction also relied on the inclusion of the
  words "donation" and "contribution" in the language of the definition and
  on the policy of Act 250, favoring a focus on land use rather than the
  particular institutional activity associated with that land use.  Id.

       The Foundation further argues that this interpretation of the rule
  eviscerates the general meaning of commercial purpose -- thus impermissibly
  expanding the jurisdiction of Act 250. The term "commercial," however, can
  have many different meanings depending on the context in which it is used. 
  See 9 V.S.A. § 2351(15) (defining "commercial purpose" in context of motor
  vehicle financing as "a purpose related to the production, exhibition,
  marketing, transportation, processing or manufacture of goods or services
  by any person, where the cash price of the motor vehicle, exclusive of any
  finance charges, exceeds the sum of $20,000"); 10 V.S.A. § 1381(1)
  (defining "commercial establishment" in context of the Water Pollution
  Control Act to include charitable activities).  In deciding Act 250
  jurisdiction, we must view the term "commercial purpose" within the context
  of a land use statute, not as a tax statute or trade regulation.  Viewing
  the language of Rule 2(L) in this context, "commercial purpose" refers to
  land use by multiple parties as a result of the developer's provision of
  facilities, goods  or

 <Page 8>

  services.  We are bound by the language of that definition as adopted
  by the Board and ratified by the Legislature, not by a general concept of a
  commercial purpose.  Having followed the language of the definition within
  the spirit of a land use statute, we have not expanded the jurisdiction
  beyond the intent of the Legislature.  See In re Agency of Administration,
  141 Vt. 68, 76, 444 A.2d 1349, 1352 (1982) (although purpose of Act 250 is
  broad, it was not intended to reach all land use changes within state). 
  Moreover, our holding does not empty the term "commercial" of any content
  in this context.  A distinction remains, for example, between nonprofit
  commercial development and development for personal residential or
  recreational use.

       The Foundation's arguments fail to consider the context of the case --
  jurisdiction for land use permits.  The Foundation would treat a project
  funded by a wealthy philanthropist who does not directly benefit from the
  project differently from the same project funded by the people who use that
  project.  While such distinctions may be critical for tax purposes or trade
  regulation, they are irrelevant in the context of a land use statute.  The
  environmental impacts of a dormitory funded by third parties are exactly
  the same as the impacts of a dormitory funded by the people who use that
  dormitory.  If, instead of building a residence hall for underprivileged
  children, the Foundation proposed building an incinerator or a factory for
  agricultural research, Act 250 jurisdiction would undoubtedly be less
  controversial.  While we applaud the ultimate purpose of the Foundation's
  mission, we refuse to rely on inappropriate distinctions to create
  exceptions to Act 250 jurisdictional requirements.

       Affirmed.


                                        FOR THE COURT:



                                        ___________________________
                                        Associate Justice


  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Footnotes


FN1.  The Legislature's ratification of these rules defeats the
  argument that the Agency exceeded its statutory authority in promulgating
  the rules.  Our consideration of the Legislature's intent must be based
  both on the statute and on the rules.


  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Concurring



       NOTICE:  This opinion is subject to motions for reargument under
  V.R.A.P. 40 as well as formal revision before publication in the Vermont
  Reports.  Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions,
  Vermont Supreme Court, 109 State Street, Montpelier, Vermont 05609-0801 of
  any errors in order that corrections may be made before this opinion goes
  to press.


                                 No. 94-332


In re Spring Brook Farm                           Supreme Court
   Foundation, Inc.
                                                  On Appeal from
                                                  Environmental Board

                                                  February Term, 1995


Arthur Gibb, Chair

       Stephen R. Crompton and Dennis R. Pearson of Gravel and Shea,
  Burlington, for appellant

       John D. Hansen, Rutland, for appellee

       Jeffrey L. Amestoy, Attorney General, and Mary L. Borg, Assistant
  Attorney General, Montpelier, for amicus State


PRESENT:  Allen, C.J., Gibson, Dooley, Morse and Johnson, JJ.


       ALLEN, C.J., concurring.   I concur in the result because the building
  which the Foundation proposes to construct comes within the definition of
  "commercial dwelling" in Board Rule 2(M).  It is intended to be occupied by
  humans, on an intermittent basis, and in exchange for contributions and/or
  donations.  The legislative ratification of the rule requires that we
  enforce its plain meaning.  I agree with the dissent that Rule 2(L) does
  not apply because the de facto exchange found to exist in In re Baptist
  Fellowship, 144 Vt. 636, 481 A.2d 1274 (1984) is not present here. 
  According to the findings, the Foundation will construct the building using
  existing resources.  The Foundation's goal is for its program to become
  self-supporting in the future through contributions.  The construction of
  the facility by the Foundation is not in exchange for donations or
  contributions.


                              _______________________________________
                              Chief Justice




-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Dissenting


       NOTICE:  This opinion is subject to motions for reargument under
  V.R.A.P. 40 as well as formal revision before publication in the Vermont
  Reports.  Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions,
  Vermont Supreme Court, 109 State Street, Montpelier, Vermont 05609-0801 of
  any errors in order that corrections may be made before this opinion goes
  to press.


                                 No. 94-332


In re Spring Brook Farm                           Supreme Court
   Foundation, Inc.
                                                  On Appeal from
                                                  Environmental Board

                                                  February Term, 1995


Arthur Gibb, Chair

       Stephen R. Crompton and Dennis R. Pearson of Gravel and Shea,
  Burlington, for appellant

       John D. Hansen, Rutland, for appellee

       Jeffrey L. Amestoy, Attorney General, and Mary L. Borg, Assistant
  Attorney General, Montpelier, for amicus State


PRESENT:  Allen, C.J., Gibson, Dooley, Morse and Johnson, JJ.


       DOOLEY, J., dissenting.   Today, the majority has written the
  commercial purpose test out of Act 250, implementing the view that any
  major development should be subject to Act 250 jurisdiction.  Since the law
  implemented by the majority opinion bears no relation to that enacted by
  the Legislature, I dissent.

       The majority opinion is clearly at odds with the legislative intent
  and the words chosen to define Act 250 jurisdiction.  The state defines
  "development" to mean "construction of improvements on a tract or tracts of
  land . . . involving more than 10 acres of land . . . for commercial and
  industrial purposes."  10 V.S.A. § 6001(3).  By limiting development to
  that for commercial or industrial purposes, the Legislature made a
  conscious decision not to regulate all land use that has environmental
  impacts.  We described that decision in In re Agency of Admin., 141 Vt. 68,
  76, 444 A.2d 1349, 1352 (1982):

 <Page 2>


          [A]lthough the purposes of Act 250 are broad, the Legislature in
          passing the Act did not purport to reach all land use changes
          within the state, nor to impose the substantial administrative and
          financial burdens of the Act, or interfere with local control of land
          use decisions, except where values of state concern are implicated
          through large scale changes in land utilization. . . .  The Act was
          a philosophic compromise between a desire to protect and control
          all the lands and environment of the State of Vermont, and the
          need to avoid an administrative nightmare. . . .  The importance
          of this compromise aspect of the legislation to our decision here is
          well illustrated by the history behind the legislative definition of
          "development" now codified at 10 V.S.A. § 6001(3).


  Id. (Citations omitted.)

       Although we have never explored the reason for the legislative choice,
  the rationale for an identical choice in the Maine environmental law has
  been explained by the Maine Supreme Court:

            We think that the use of the word "commercial" was intended to
          describe the motivation for the development and not the type of
          activity to be performed on the property after it is developed.  We
          consider that the Legislature chose to distinguish between
          commercial and non-commercial developments for a sound reason
          -- it doubtless concluded that a greater need for supervision exists
          in the case of commercially motivated development where the
          dominant factor is the hope for profit than in a non-commercial
          development where land is being prepared for public enjoyment or
          divided for family distribution or for some other purpose than
          profit.  In other words, commercial residential developments have
          a propensity for being big, concentrated and exhausting to the
          resources of the environment.


  In re Spring Valley Dev., 300 A.2d 736, 742 (Me. 1973).  I have no
  doubt that the Vermont Legislature's rationale is similar.  Act 250 is an
  environmental control law because the Legislature saw that certain land
  uses were "destructive to the environment and . . . not suitable to the
  demands and needs of the people of the state."  1969, No. 250 (Adj. Sess.),
  § 1 (statement of findings and declaration of intent).  As in Maine, the
  Legislature drew a line that it thought would capture developments
  particularly "big, concentrated and exhausting to the resources of the
  environment" without using a more vague, discretionary and difficult-to-
  administer jurisdictional standard.  It is our duty to protect and enforce
  this legislative choice.

 <Page 3>

       Contrary to the majority's characterization, the term "commercial
  activity" has a clear, commonly accepted meaning in land use regulation. 
  It denotes "any type of business or activity which is carried on for a
  profit."  Black's Law Dictionary 270 (6th ed. 1990); see Siegel v. City of
  Oakland, 145 Cal. Rptr. 62, 67 (Cal. Ct. App. 1978) (term imports commerce,
  trade, business, industry or enterprise having financial profit as primary
  aim); Roberts Enters., Inc. v. Secretary of Transp., 699 P.2d 479, 483
  (Kan. 1985) (same); Lanski v. Montealegre, 104 N.W.2d 772, 774 (Mich. 1960)
  (in broad sense, commercial activity includes any type of business or
  activity carried on for profit);  Imbergamo v. Barclay, 352 N.Y.S.2d 337,
  341 (N.Y. Sup. Ct. 1973) (term "commercial" in zoning law denotes uses for
  profit);  Cordell v. Codington County, 526 N.W.2d 115, 117 (S.D. 1994)
  (adopting the Blacks' Law Dictionary definition).   We defined it in the
  context of commercial property in Lewis v. Town of Brandon, 132 Vt. 37, 42,
  313 A.2d 673, 676 (1973): "The primary purpose of commercial property is to
  produce an income or profit for the owner."  No one could conceive that the
  activity in this case would come even close to a commonsense definition of
  "commercial."

       The majority's answer to the obvious mislabeling of petitioner's
  activity as commercial is that the Environmental Board has specially
  defined the word "commercial," and the Legislature has ratified that
  definition, in a way different from the normal definition.  I agree that
  the definition in Environmental Board Rule 2(L) expands the definition
  beyond its normal limits, but cannot agree that the new definition has
  somehow created a license to further expand the definition to the point
  where it is defined by its antonym.  This process reminds me of the
  children's game where a phrase is passed from person to person to compare
  its final version with that uttered originally.  As here, the result is
  often a distortion of the original phrase, made possible by slight
  differences in restatement by persons who do not know what the original
  phrase was.  Only if you do not know, or apply, the Legislature's term
  "commercial" can you reach a definition that includes this petitioner's
  activities within it.

       I agree that the critical precedent is In re Baptist Fellowship, 144
  Vt. 636, 481 A.2d

 <Page 4>

  1274 (1984), where we held that the Rule 2(L) definition of
  "commercial purpose" is broad enough to encompass a nonprofit church
  development funded by church parishioners.  Id. at 639, 481 A.2d at 1276. 
  We agreed that the financial arrangement between the church and the
  parishioners had the exchange element of a commercial transaction because
  the parishioners were providing money to construct the church in order to
  use that facility and take part in the religious services provided within
  it.  Id.  Here, there is no exchange like that required in Baptist
  Fellowship.  Only by holding that the elements found determinative in
  Baptist Fellowship are superfluous and unnecessary can we say that there is
  a commercial purpose here.

       The alternative theory of exchange found by the majority is present in
  every charitable or nonprofit activity and result in the evisceration of
  any commonsense definition of "commercial."  The majority holds that
  because persons who give to petitioner's charitable activities expect
  something charitable to be done with the money, there is, therefore, an
  exchange of the donation for the charitable activities.  Since no one who
  gives to a charity is uninterested in the beneficial purposes to which the
  charity is dedicated, all charitable giving fits within the majority's
  exchange rationale.  The result of this distorted application of an
  exchange is that a term which is associated with profit-making activity is
  now defined to include all activity conducted on a not-for-profit basis.

       As the majority states, we must defer to the Board's interpretation of
  the Act and its rules, absent compelling indication of error.  On the other
  hand, the Board "may not use its rule-making authority to enlarge a
  restrictive grant of jurisdiction from the Legislature." In re Agency of
  Admin., 141 Vt. at 76, 444 A.2d at 1352.  I can think of no greater
  indication of error than that the Board turns a word restricting its
  jurisdiction into its opposite in order to establish jurisdiction.  After
  today's decision, the word "commercial" is effectively deleted from the
  statute.  I dissent.




                                  -----------------------------
                                  Associate Justice
