Journal of General Microbiology (rg7o), 63, 1-20
Printed in Great Britain

DEC 1 9 l!JPe

I

The Discovery of DNA : An Ironic Tale of Chance,
       Prejudice and Insight

         Third Griffith Memorial Lecture

       By M. R. POLLOCK
Department of Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh

(Delivered at the General Meeting of the Society for General Microbiology
             on 6 Aprii 1970)

`Truth emerges more readily from error than from confusion.'
           FRANCIS BACON (1620), Novum Organum

The Council of our now almost venerable Society must, in inviting me to give the
third lecture in this series, have been at their wits' end to have had to scrape the barrel
so desperately.

Unlike my two illustrious predecessors who were-in very different ways-natural
choices for the job, I cannot claim to have made any significant contribution to
scientific knowledge in the areas where Fred Griffith did most of his work. Sincerely
honoured though I am, it is obvious to me that I am not really qualified to follow in
their footsteps.

So I shall not try to. And I thought that, instead of talking about recent researches
of personal appeal to myself, it might be more appropriate to stand aside and view
some of the historical aspects of DNA in those early days before, during and shortly
after Fred Griffith recorded his all-important discovery of transformation of pneumo-
coccal types.
Hence the rather grandiose title.
Of course I could never attempt to produce anything approaching a complete
history-or even a balanced summary-of DNA in the space of one lecture. And I
certainly would not wish to compete with Jim Watson's Double Helix(l) or try to touch
on all the events after 1953 which comprise, in fact, most of modern molecular
biology.

It is a tricky business, involving considerable personal risks, touching on contem-
porary history. Erwin Chargaff, very appropriately, if rather cynically, wrote(2) that
such an attempt `must be very difficult as long as some of the witnesses, with all their
quirks, senilities and dubious recollections are still alive'. `Later it will be easier,' he
added, `no one being left to protest against truth or falsehood.'
I want, if I can, to try to capture the scientific atmosphere of the years between 1928,
when Griffith published his now famous paper(3), through 1944 when Avery and his
colleagues(8 showed that the transforming agent was DNA, to the great breakthrough
in 1953 when Watson & Crick@) published their structure of DNA and showed how it
might explain the chemical mechanism by which cells passed on their characters

Vol. 62, No. 3 was issued 14 December 1970


2                        M. R. POLLOCK
accurately to their daughter cells. And let us have no illusions about this discovery of
1953. Without doubt it represented-that is, it was the culminating point in-one of
the most fundamental and important discoveries in biology of all time. This was
because it shows not only how living systems replicate themselves (and not something
different) but has led directly to an understanding of how their functional characters
are expressed.
But, having emphasized the excitement of the concluding stages in this development
of biology, it is wise to remember that the importance of the three crucial points-
Griffith's discovery of transformation(31, Avery's demonstration that the transforming
material was DNA(41, and Crick & Watson's solution@) of its structure-rested on
what Maurice Wilkins(6) has emphasized were three essential and much older basic
concepts: the gene, the macromolecule and the hydrogen bond.
We could paraphrase these concepts respectively as: the `discreteness' of the
inheritance of characters, the huge size of molecules concerned with biological
specificity and the great importance of weak inter-atomic bonds (as distinct from the
strong covalent links of classical chemistry) in biological systems.
The theme of DNA has now permeated so deeply into the consciousness of most
educated people that it is unusual still to find someone-at least in academic circles-
who has never heard of it. But it still occurs. Only the other day Bill Hayes and I were
showing off our laboratories to a charming and distinguished personality in the Fine
Arts Department of Edinburgh University. We stopped proudly before our three-
dimensional atomic model of the DNA double helix. `What is that?' our visitor
queried. `That,' we replied, `is DNA.' His face was blank. `You surely know about
DNA?' we unwisely reproached him. `No,' he answered, `I've never heard of such a
thing. What is it?' Now, that's not a particularly interesting story as it stands. What
made it especially odd for us was that the individual concerned happened to be the
perfect double of Francis Crick. The incident had a macabre, almost nightmarish
quality that, for an instant, was quite alarming: time passing backwards, visions of all
the great scientists denying their discoveries and pleading total ignorance of the field in
which they made their names. But at least, after recovery, it reminded us that it takes a
very long time for great basic discoveries-as distinct from purely technical advances-
to take a real hold on ordinary people.
And we are only really at the very beginning of the sequence of repercussions that
the discovery of DNA has initiated. Freud, it is said, believed that there were three
really outstanding events in the evolution of human knowledge: the Copernican
Theory of the Solar System; the Darwinian Theory of Evolution; and (not sur-
prisingly) the Recognition of Unconscious Mental Processes.
Many will, of course, disagree with such a list, which by its nature must be a gross
over-simplification. But the Understanding of the Chemical Basis of Life (which must,
of course, include Heredity) might now be a strong candidate for inclusion as a fourth
item, though this may be premature and, unlike the others, would not, I think,
amount to a new scientific paradigm in the sense used by Kuhn(7). However that may
be, it is interesting that all four items share the property of whittling down the cosmic
significance of man. The first showed that man is just part of the Universe (not the
centre), the second that man is just part of all living systems (not something funda-
mentally distinct), the third that man's will and personality-his `soul'-are justparts
of mental processes in general, and the fourth (the discovery of DNA) that living


The discovery of DNA

3

systems themselves are just parts of all chemical processes, albeit rather complicated
ones and not subject to transcendent vitalistic forces.

Through these discoveries the mystic concept of the stature of man and his cosmic
significance has been superseded by a complementary increase in his potential control
over the Universe-or what should now be paraphrased as a `recognition of the
increasingly important part the phenomenon of man is playing in the evolution of the
Universe'. At all events, he still thinks he is awfully important.

I am rather afraid that Fred Griffith might have been rather shocked, if not horrified,
to know that his own work was considered a vital link in the chain of advances in
knowledge which could be analysed in such materialistic terms.

But this is the way with history. And I am very conscious that in choosing to tackle
this subject of DNA historically I am running many risks-not least of which is that of
being a terrible bore-especially to the young.

Peter Medawar, paying tribute to the vital part played by Griffith's discovery,
wrote in a review@) of Jim Watson's Double Helix (which makes no mention of
Griffith): `A great many highly creative scientists. . . take it quite for granted that an
interest in the history of science is a sign of failing or unawakened powers.. .Science in
some sense comprehends its history within itself. No Fred, no Jim: that is obvious, at
least to scientists, and being obvious, it is understandable that it should be left unsaid

. . . the history of science does not often interest the scientist as science.'
Whitehead @)-in a rather different sense-went further when he remarked almost

cynically that: `A science that hesitates to forget its founders is lost.'

Science history need not be a bore, but my apology tonight is rather in the nature of
hoping that it can interest the scientist as science; or at least in close relation to the
practice of science; that attempts to follow what in fact has been taking place over the
period of an important discovery-the prejudices, the mistakes, the desires and per-
sonalities of the participants, the lucky and unlucky chances, the synthesis of ideas, the
symbols and analogies, the relationships between entities and the sequence of events-
may help in understanding the way human beings behave in their search for knowledge
and so give some hints as to how to try to do it better.

The early history of DNA is full of instances of irrational forces that seem both to
hinder and to help. But I can really do little more than indicate how the wind was
blowing. It is surely premature to try to offer any sort of general theory of discovery.
The story of DNA will mean different things to different people; but I believe it carries
with it a few clues of how such discoveries are made-or perhaps, rather, of what sorts
of things confuse us and delay the rate of progress.

The beginning of the story-of course, there is really no true beginning-lies long
before 1928. Fred Griffith never hinted in his paper(3) that he contemplated that
nucleic acid might have had a part to play in his transformation. But it would have
been quite logical and possible for him to have done so, and `nucleoproteins' were in
fact discussed in his laboratory(l0) in relation to the phenomenon.

In fact, nucleic acids were first discovered and characterized by Miescher in 1869,
i.e. almost exactly IOO years ago(l1). Indeed, this remarkable chemist devoted most of
his life to studying them. Moreover, as pointed out by Olby & Posner(l21, his views on
the chemical basis of inheritance were remarkably far-seeing when, in 1892, he postu-
lated heredity being derived from the `stereo-architecture of only a few very large,
complicated molecules'.


4                        M. R. POLLOCK
It might have been supposed that he was thinking of nucleic acids since he worked
for most of his life on little else. Ironically enough, however, it seems he was probably
referring to proteins because Mirsky (11) quotes him as saying in an article attacking
Weismann (who was in favour of nuclein being the heredity substance) that `his
[Weismann's] speculations are unclear and derived from an outmoded kind of
chemistry. When, as is quite possible, a protein molecule has 40 asymmetric C atoms
so that there can be a billion isomers. . .my [stereochemical] theory is better suited
than any other to account for the unimaginable diversity required by our knowledge of
heredity.'
It was, indeed, at about that time that Staudinger was emphasizing a completely new
idea for chemistry-the macromolecular polymer of biological origin. Even earlier
than that v. Nageli was developing the idea of an `idioplasm'-an intracellular
substance that was continuous through cell division and carried with it hereditary
determinants (a sort of Weismann substance at the intercellular level), a concept
which was well received by people such as de Vries and E. B. Wilson. The possibility
came to be considered by several contemporary biologists that it might be identical
with chromatin, the material associated with chromosomes.
`In the physiological aspect', wrote Wilson in the first edition of his famous book(l3)
`inheritance is the recurrence, in successive generations, of like forms of metabolism;
and this is effected through the transmission from generation to generation of a specific
substance or idioplasm which we have seen reason to identify with chromatin.. . .
In 1895, in another context(l8, he had stated that: `. . .[this] seems to show that the
chromosomal substance, the chromatin, is to be regarded as the physical basis of
inheritance'. And he went on: `Now, chromatin is known to be closely similar to, if not
identical with, a substance known as nuclein, which analysis shows to be a tolerably
definite chemical compound composed of nucleic acid and albumin. And thus we
reach the remarkable conclusion that inheritance may perhaps be effected by the
physical transmission of a particular chemical compound from parent to off-
spring.'
I have quoted these passages by Wilson at length because I think they illustrate two
interesting points. The first is the remarkable extent-under the existing circumstances
-to which the great biologists at the end of the last century had begun to grasp the
situation: had got the right end of the stick, so to speak. The second is their failure to
recognize the need to explain the basic phenomenon of inheritance: namely, the
mechanism by which a character, or the chemical basis of a character, is copied, is
multiplied-indefinitely-through successive generations. They talk only of ` trans-
mission' of a character or by a substance--taking itfor granted that the substance will
be faithfully replicated somehow. They barely do that, because in fact I do not believe
they are completely clear that something must be increased, although-and this is the
point-they have arrived at the conclusion that the `something' is a definable chemical
substance. The problem-as it was seen much later on, in the present century-was not
then being defined. Nor was it, as I shall emphasize later on, apparently appreciated by
Griffith. The `self-reproducing' molecule was not an idea that appeared until much
later. At the best, heredity was, in ancient days, the passing on of a minute replica of
the parent to the progeny: the homunculus in the head of the sperm, etc. Self-repro-
duction must have been regarded vitalistically, as an essential and natural property
of `life' and `living systems'-not properly recognized as a phenomenon needing an


             The discovery of DNA                 5
explanation, barely recognized as a phenomenon at all-as universal gravity before
Newton, or the relativity of motion before Einstein.
It was regarded as being as natural and inherent a feature of `life', as falling
bodies were regarded by the Aristotelians as `naturally' seeking their true home (the
Earth) or the heavenly spheres were regarded Iby Copernicus and Galileo as moving
naturally in circles, or by Descartes and Newton naturally in straight lines by their
own inertia.
This problem of recognizing a problem may, of course, depend upon there being the
tools for beginning to solve it. But, above all, it makes one wonder what sorts of
problem we may not be capable of recognizing at the moment. Biologists no doubt
would like to think they were all a matter for physicists!
With the turn of the century, nucleic acids began to suffer a decline in prestige which
persisted until the mid 1930s. For a long time their possible biological significance
seems to have been almost completely rejected or forgotten. Even E. B. Wilson(l5) in
the second edition of his book, published in 1900, seems to have begun to lose the
original excited interest he showed in his first edition written only five years previously.
He already comes out clearly against the `genetic continuity of chromosomes depend-
ing upon a persistence of chromatin'.
In 1909 Strasburger explained the diminishing interest in `nuclein' when he reasoned
that `chromatin cannot itself be the hereditary substance [because] the amount of it is
subject to considerable variation in the nucleus according to its stage of development'
(11). (This argument was still operative in the 1940s.)
And in the third edition (1925) Wilson now writes(l6): `It is an interesting fact,
which has been emphasized by biochemists, that apart from the characteristic differ-
ences between animals and plants referred to above [he means RNA for plants and
DNA for animals-the dogma then current], the nucleic acids of the nucleus are on the
whole remarkably uniform, showing with present methods of analysis no differences
in any degree commensurate with those from the various species of cells from which
they are derived. In this respect they show a remarkable contrast to the proteins which,
whether simple or compound, seem to be of inexhaustible variety. It has been suggested,
accordingly, that the differences between different " chromatins depend upon their
basic or protein components and not upon their nucleic acids". '
The cause of this `eclipse period' was paradoxically, but unquestionably, the rise of
biochemistry; in particular, of course, the recognition of the vast variety of proteins
(definable as chemical compounds the more strikingly after the crystallization of
haemoglobin and egg albumen) with their huge range of distinct biological specificities.
For the chemists who were tearing to pieces the delicate structure of the cell with
ever-mounting violence, naturally flushed with the success of isolating the key and
relatively robust small molecules of amino acids, vitamins and co-enzymes, the delicate
macromolecular `goo' of nucleic acid may have seemed an amorphous mixture of
irrelevancies. It is surprising that the integrity and native configuration of at least some
proteins seem to have survived their attack. Nucleic acids were still isolated, but grossly
degraded in what was believed to be a tetranucleotide state-containing an emasculated
sequence of only four bases.
Even as late as the 1920s arguments were occurring as to whether nucleic acids might
possibly range up to a size as could include five or even six bases. And it was not until
the 1930s that the older, gentler methods for their extraction began to be reinstated


6                      M. R. POLLOCK
and it was slowly realized that their molecular weights might be very much larger than
the 1500 daltons appropriate for a single tetranucleotide. Even then, most nucleic acid
chemists, such as Levene & Bass (whose large book(lcl) on their properties barely
touches on their possible biological significance), regarded them as homopolymers of
balanced tetranucleotides containing all four bases in the same order and proportions.
A lot of the trouble, of course, was poor techniques-both for estimating nucleotides
and separating what were the grossly degraded hydrolytic products of macromolecular
nucleic acids from each other.
It was also misleading that the proportions of bases in the only types of DNA then
being studied-those from higher animals-`happened', so to speak, to be roughly
equal. We would say now that their proportions of guanine and cytosine (G + C) of
total base present being not far off 50 %, and since content of guanine must equal that
of cytosine, and adenine content must equal that of thymine in all double-stranded
DNA, all four bases would inevitably be present in roughly equal amounts. Had the
chemists of those days systematically studied bacterial DNA where G + C content can
vary between 25 o/o and 75 %, the tetranucleotide hypothesis might have died an earlier
death.
It is interesting and somewhat ironical to note that in 1931 Levene & Bass071 do in
fact mention the nucleic acid of tubercle bacilli, with a G+C content of DNA now
known to be around 66% (Hill(18)), as yielding a material which showed great
difficulty in giving a constant composition. But this anxiety was concentrated on the
finding that the material contained both thymine and uracil. That was either against the
great current dogma or showed that bacteria were neither plants nor animals!
The dogma in those days, it will be remembered, was that the nucleic acid of plants
(`yeast nucleic acid') was always RNA and that of animals (`thymonucleic acid') DNA.
And this further confused the picture.
By then, however, things were perhaps just beginning to look up. The chemical
nadir for nucleic acids must surely be represented by some of the opinions expressed in
a well-known `monograph' on Nucleic Acids(N) published in 1914, with a preface
beginning `The Nucleic Acids constitute what is possibly the best understood field of
physiological chemistry', at the time of the most rapid advances in the Hopkins
School of Biochemistry! Its contents include sections such as: `Both nucleic acids
[thymus and yeast] also yield cytosine . . . but where animal nucleic acids yield thymine,
plant nucleic acids yield uracil and this distinction holds in every case. Finally, plant
nucleic acids contain a pentose group. . . On the contrary, all animal nucleic acids give
rise to laevulinic acid which is formed from a hexose group in their molecule. These
statements are universally granted, and one sufficiently alert to the possible sources of
experimental error cannot obtain results which differ from them.' And a little later on:
` . . . It is therefore necessary to discuss only two nucleic acids in order to have an
understanding of them all.' It is possible to understand and forgive ignorance and
mistakes ; but surely not such complacent arrogance as that?
It seems to have been almost in the very nature of biochemistry in its early days-
perhaps its need to `prove itself' as respectable chemistry applied to biological tissues-
to operate against ultra-dangerous concepts such as those of huge molecules, weak
inter-atomic forces and a type of inter-molecular specificity that might appear ludi-
crous to the orthodox chemist and mechanistic to biologists.
Even Gowland Hopkins, who pulled no punches in his support for the analytic


            The discovery of DNA                 7
attack chemists were making on biological systems at that time, was very much on
the defensive when he pointed out in a lecture at Harvard in 1936(20> that `so long as
[the modern biochemist's] analysis involves the isolation of events, and not merely of
substances, he is not in danger of so departing from reality that his studies have no
longer biological meaning'. Thinking of the structure of DNA and how its solution
only 17 years later provided the clue to an understanding of heredity and the
biosynthesis of proteins, one is struck by how wide of the mark this observation proved
to be. Hopkins, indeed, considered chemical structure could form the basis for explain-
ing morphology, but no more. And two years later he was hard put to it confronting
the Cambridge school of cytology under James Gray in defending even that possi-
bility (21).
At the same time, many of the earlier biochemists, like some of the younger and
lesser molecular biologists of the present day in their turn, were brash in their claims
and interpretations. They tended to shorten and oversimplify the gap between the
function and structure of biological systems (on the one hand) and the chemistry of the
molecules of which such systems are composed (on the other). As so often happens,
the rise of one science set back the development of another.
This, then, was the climate into which Fred Griffith's famous transformation paper
was born in 1928(3). And he entered the field laterally, so to speak, without, I believe,
realizing it and without appreciating much of what we now, with hindsight, know to
have been vitally relevant to the whole history of DNA.
Fred Griffith was a modest and retiring personality who enjoyed working quietly on
his own, shunning scientific meetings. According to his colleague V. D. Allison( he
had to be practically forced into a taxi to attend the London International Micro-
biology Congress in 1936. And then, I am told(221, he reluctantly and nervously read
out his rather boring paper in such an unenthusiastic manner that those not closely
concerned with the detailed streptococcal typing techniques he was expounding must
hardly have felt it was worth listening to. This was, it seems, the only paper he ever
delivered at an open meeting and it had, of course, nothing to do with transformation.
He would not even be persuaded to give an informal paper to the Medical Research
Club with a view to becoming a member(22).
He was also very reluctant to write papers; but immensely hard-working, meticu-
lously careful and scrupulously honest in his researches. Before 1928 he had made
important contributions to the epidemiology of infectious diseases, first with his brother
Stanley in typing tubercle bacilli and later, more or less on his own, in the classifi-
cation of streptococcal types as well as Salmonella and staphylococci. At that time,
Graham Wilson has pointed out (231, he was firmly convinced of the fixity of bacterial
types-at least in so far as the mammalian tubercle bacilli were concerned. The
vagaries of the pneumococcus in the changes from smooth, virulent (S) to rough,
attentuated (R) and back again may well have been a source of irritation as well as
interest. His description (3) of his great discovery occupied quite a small proportion of
what would nowadays be regarded as an immensely long 46-page paper on `The
significance of pneumococcal types'. In this he showed that heat-killed S pneumococci
of (for instance) type I could, when inoculated into mice along with living R cells
originally of type II, lead to the appearance of virulent S cells of type I (and vice versa).
It must surely have been made almost despite his own emotional inclinations, rather
than, as is so often the case, because of them.


8                     M.R.POLLOCK
We are used to hearing about how Copernicus, the mystic Sun-worshipper, must
have been irrationally impelled towards a theory of the Universe that made the Sun,
rather than the Earth, its centre. And, again, about how Pasteur himself, a devout
Christian of the old school, launched himself so fiercely into the controversy against
the then quite fashionable doctrine of Spontaneous Generation because the idea of the
creation of life without God was an impious thought.
With Fred Griffith, it must, if anything, have been quite the opposite. It was his
great care, perfectly planned controls and scrupulous honesty that forced him not to
hedge and towards the correct conclusion that (to quote) `there seems to be no alterna-
tive to the hypothesis of transformation of type'(3). One almost wonders to what
extent he might have wished for an alternative! And he adds that `this is considered
less unacceptable than previously because it is now (since the last few years) widely
recognized that R forms occur spontaneously and can spontaneously revert to their
own S type'. In fact, ironically enough, the S to R change (in the presence of immune
serum) was well appreciated even in the previous century, and we now know that it and
the reversion of R to S must (presumably) be due usually to point mutations-quite a
different process from transformation, which involves substitution of one or more
genes (i.e. a long stretch of DNA), through DNA recombination, by their allelic
homologues.
The demonstration of specific transformation was an achievement in other respects,
as perhaps would only be properly realized if it is appreciated how confusing the
situation must have appeared at the time, due to facts such as the following:
(I) Not only could R types revert to their `own' S types spontaneously, but it had
long been known that this reversion could be greatly enhanced by a number of non-
specific factors, including the addition of heat-killedpneumococci of the same or another
type. (This was currently thought to be due to the action, in the culture, of toxic
`aggressins' which operated against leucocytes.)
(2) The temperatures used for killing the S types of cell affected the transforming
abilities of different types differentially, Quite apart from that, transforming abilities
differed between types, as also did non-specific stimulation of reversions.
However, the key fact elucidated by Griffith was that if change of type occurred, it
was only in the presence of heat-killed cells of another type and towards the same type
as that of the added, killed cells.
I hope it will not be taken in any way depreciatory of his achievement if I point
out that Griffith seemed to have had little idea of how this transformation came
about, nor even of its great and ultimate significance. His discovery was a classic
instance of pure serendipity.
After all, he was, in essence, a naturalist. His interpretation was teleogical and looked
at from the point of view of the pneumococcus which, being the kind of organism with
which he was associated for most of his working life, I suspect he must have loved,
with the quiet, but usually unexpressed, passion that all true biologists have for the
system with which they work.
`The apparent transformation,' he writes, `is not an abrupt change of one type into
another, but a process of evolution through an intermediate stage, the R form, from
which the type characters have been obliterated.' In this, of course, he is quite wrong,
although, for purely technical reasons, it was a long time before it was found possible
to transform S types directly into one another. This view is also rather inconsistent with


            The discovery of DNA                9
the attitude he takes elsewhere in the same paper postulating the idea of `cycles of
states' through which the pneumococcus may pass, and the feeling that, perhaps, in
the R state remnants of the previous S state had not been entirely eliminated: `minor'
components of all types could have been present in all types after all, he points out.
`It would appear', he says, `that the type I antigen no longer serves its purpose
[my italics] in the presence of the immune substance formed during convalescence, and
the pneumococcus consequently develops its type II side.. . . The idea of a regular
sequence of changes in the type of pneumococcus before the development of pneu-
monia and during recovery. . . is in harmony with the experimental data.'
Although apparently quite clear that the controlling factor in manifestation of type
specificity was the substance responsible for forming the `specific soluble substance'
(SSS) (i.e. the polysaccharide of the capsule) and not the SSS itself, he did not distin-
guish clearly between it and the factor actually responsible for transformation which,
very understandably, he took for granted must be a protein. The actual words he used
were: `When the R form of either type is furnished under suitable experimental
conditions with a mass of the S form of the other type, it appears to utilize that antigen
as a pabulum from which to build up a similar antigen and thus to develop into an S
strain of that type.' This seems somewhat inconsistent with his clear conclusion that the
heat-lability of the transforming factor indicated that it could not be the heat-stable
polysaccharide antigen itself.
Apart from that, and, as with the biologists of the last century to whom I have
already referred, there does not appear to be any realization that there is a fundamental
problem here. `Pabulum' simply means a source of food, and there is no indication
that what had to be explained was how such a specific pabulum (be it antigen itself or
antigen-forming factor) gave rise-indefinitely-to more of the same pabulum. In fact,
scientists were only just beginning seriously to attempt to do this at the time, nor
indeed was the problem-clear and obvious though it seems to us now-really
formulated properly for another eight years, when J. B. S. Haldane wrote a remarkable
article to which I will refer in detail later on.
However, H. J. Muller, in a brilliant essay041 written as early as 1922, had pointed
to the difficulty of understanding the ` self-propagation' property of the gene: ` . . . the
fact that, within the complicated environment of the cell protoplasm, it reacts in such
a way as to convert some of the common surrounding material into an end-product
identical in kind with the original gene itself `. But he later (in the same article) admits
that `there is yet no means of deciding whether the chief features of the autocatalytic
mechanism [of the gene] reside in the structure of the genes themselves, and that the
outer protoplasm does little more than provide the building material. . _ `, or whether
`gene structure might mean nothing more than the possession by each gene of some
very simple character. . . which enables each gene to enter into combination with
certain highly organized materials in the outer protoplasm in such a way as to result in
the formulation "by" the protoplasm of more material like this gene which is in
combination with it `.
We should now, of course, describe the problem of deciding between these two
alternatives as that of determining where the exclusive information for gene replication
resides: in the DNA itself or in molecules used for the biosynthesis of DNA, namely
the enzymes and building blocks concerned.
Fred Griffith's paper was not ignored (as might almost have been expected). His


IO                       M. R. POLLOCK
findings were confirmed by Neufeld & Levinthal(25) and others only a year or two
later. But there was considerable scepticism and even frank disbelief amongst many
bacteriologists, none of whom, however, as Graham Wilson emphasized(23), would
`dare express their doubts in public' because of his great reputation for scientific
integrity. ` Griffith,' Wilson says, `they thought might have been misled by some
technical error, but he would never have put his name to anything in whose truth he
was not profoundly convinced.'
In fact, his firm conclusion on the reality of type transformation must have been all
the more convincing to others-and therefore more effective in stimulating their
interest-just because he was so well known as a sceptic and as one who demanded the
most rigorous proof of a new discovery before accepting it. According to his assistant,
W. R. Maxted(26), who knew him well during the last few years of his life, he was
only just beginning to accept the Lancefield group classification of streptococci in
1940, several years after it had been generally acknowledged in bacteriological circles.
He never pursued the phenomenon of transformation further himself. S. D.
Elliott(22) remembers him explaining that it was now `up to the chemists'. Nor did he,
but rarely, refer to it in conversations with others. Indeed, he turned his own attention
increasingly to the new problem of typing haemolytic streptococci-a matter of great
importance in epidemiology-and left others to continue the task of pneumococcal
typing, using the sera that he had himself prepared.
I do not believe he really could have been very much interested in the phenomenon
of transformation which he himself had discovered. But he certainly had started
something, and the research developments thus initiated continued-albeit slowly-in
a pretty well unbroken series continuously on towards the present time.
So, after 1928, the centre of interest and activity passed to the Rockefeller Institute
in New York, under the stimulating guidance of Oswald Avery.
After again confirming type transformation in vivo in 1930, Dawson(27) together
with Sia(28) demonstrated the phenomenon in vitro in 1931, and Alloway's(29)
successful transformation with crude cell-free extracts in 1932 and more purified
preparations in IyjJ(30) strengthened the interest and importance that was beginning
to be attached to it.
I do not think there is much doubt that Avery had a fair idea of what he was after
and certainly of the fundamental importance of transformation. He never actually
visited Griffith's laboratory in Endell Street, nor did he and Griffith ever correspond.
But, according to one who knew them both well(22), they held each other in high esteem
and there is no doubt that Avery was greatly stimulated by Griffith's discovery. He
shared his preoccupation with pneumococci and streptococci and in some ways was a
rather simiIar character. Both men were born within a few months of each other and
were confirmed bachelors. Both were exceedingly modest, meticulously careful in their
experimental work and extremely generous with the time they spent in helping others.
Both were almost obsessively cautious in reaching conclusions. Avery is quoted(31) as
remarking to his brother Roy, in 1943, that `it is lots of fun to blow bubbles but it is
wiser to prick them yourself before someone else tries to'. And both made their major
contributions to knowledge relatively late in life. Griffith was over 50 when he dis-
covered transformation, and Avery 67 when he published his paper on DNA as the
transforming agent. Perhaps that will be an encouragement to those of us in our sixth
decade, or beyond, to hope that even now all is not quite lost!


The discovery of DNA

II

In other respects, however, they were rather different: Avery being much more
openly friendly and communicative whereas Fred Griffith was very shy and aloof and
difficult to get to know.

There were others, besides Avery's group, who had been excited by Fred Griffith's
discovery. In 1936 Berry & Dedrick(32) claimed to have transformed the virus of
Shope's rabbit fibroma into that of the closely related infectious myxomatosis by the
addition of heat-inactivated myxomatosis virus. This effect was confirmed by others
and served to strengthen Avery's interest in the whole field.

It is, however, ironic now to know that this virus `transformation', which at the time
emphasized the general significance of the pneumococcal transformation, is no longer
considered to be a genetic effect at all, but according to Fenner(331, a rather complex
and purely phenotypic `rescue ' of the inactivated myxoma virus due to the induction of a
de-coating enzyme in the host cell which liberates, and so reactivates, the myxoma DNA.

DNA itself was still very much in the background in those days. Berry is quoted as
believing that `nucleoprotein' was the operative transforming principle in his effect.
And Avery has been mentioned as `wistfully suggesting' to Hotchkiss (341, as early as
1936, that the transforming agent ` might be a nucleic acid `. But proteins still completely
dominated the field of biological specificity; and even if nucleic acids were recognized
as respectable chemical entities (still, of course, largely as tetranucleotides!), they were
closely linked for biologists with proteins in the `nucleo-proteins' often referred to and
well known as the major constituent of viruses which were then first being studied
intensively by biochemists such as the Piries and Barbara Holmes. For instance, as
late as 1938 Hopkins(21) could write: `My colleague, Mr N. W. Pirie, has shown that
the active unit in each case [of plant viruses] is, in essential, a complex protein molecule',
even though I believe that Bill Pirie(35) was not himself rushing to such a conclusion
and already suspected that the RNA was playing a more vital role.

Avery himself, however, may have had good reason not to be so affected by the
prevailing fashion regarding the exclusive role of proteins in biological specificity. For
he had been chiefly responsible(36) for demonstrating the very high biological specifi-
city shown by the polysaccharides of the pneumococcus capsule. It could have been
easier for him, than for many others, to avoid the strong prejudice against considering
molecules other than proteins-nucleic acids themselves, for instance, known for half
a century or more to be present in, or at least associated with, chromosomes and the
nucleus-as possible repositories of powerful specificity.

But despite the remarks quoted above, even Avery seems to have been somewhat
surprised at his own finding, because in a guarded letter to his brother Roy in 1943(31),
previously referred to, at the time of his great discovery he writes of his conclusion that
the transforming agent `is in all probability DNA: who could have guessed it?'

In fact, however, the possible significance of nucleic acids was beginning to be
appreciated by others, and Mirsky(37) had written an important review in 1943 on
`Chromosomes and nucleoproteins' in which he pointed out that `the specificity of a
nucleoprotein may reside in its nucleic acid as well as in its protein moiety'. And,
discussing the chemistry of heredity, he also made the important point that `the kind of
experiment that is needed to place the chemistry of the gene on a firm basis is one in
which substances extracted from the chromosomes of an organism are administered to
a mutant form of the same organism which suffers from a deficiency in its germinal
material'. This is a pretty shrewd observation for those days and was, of course,

C--


12                     M. R. POLLOCK
exactly what Avery was doing at that very time, though neither he nor Mirsky could
possibly then have analysed it precisely in that way.
Moreover, during this period, too, there were parallel relevant general advances in
biology that served to prepare the way for the final breakthrough.
Caspersson and his school(38) had been developing techniques of ultraviolet
spectroscopy applied to intact cells with which it was possible to demonstrate the
intense absorption of wavelengths around 260 nm. (characteristic of nucleic acids-
and, of course, the single nucleotides and bases of which they were composed) within
the nucleus of living cells and by this means demonstrate a rise and fall of nuclear
nucleic acid in phase with the mitotic cycle.
During this period, too, the chemists and physicists were at last beginning to
realize that molecules of nucleic acid were much larger than the 1500 daltons appro-
priate for a single tetranucleotide, though they still tended to be regarded as aggregates
or simple polymers of `balanced' tetranucleotides containing all four bases. But the
idea of the statistical polytetranucleotide was gaining ground, largely due to the work
of Gulland (39).
Their biological role, in so far as it was formulated at all, tended to be considered in
the nature of structural support for the gene protein-or (at the best) as what was
referred to by Darlington(40) as a `midwife' molecule to assist non-specifically, in
enabling the protein of the gene to replicate itself.
The constant association of nucleic acids with `self-propagating' systems such as
chromosomes and viruses was, however, being stressed by workers such as Caspersson
and Astbury, but with reproduction by a direct copying process analogous to
crystallization. Astbury(41) in particular was understandably misled by the coincidental
fact that the spacing (3.34 A) of successive nucleotides in a polynucleotide column was
almost exactly equal to the spacing of successive side-chains in a fully extended
polypeptide.
When Avery(4) mentioned that his transforming DNA might have a molecular
weight as large as 5oo,ooo, this was not out of keeping with views of chemists and
physicists, though we now know that such a size, being barely enough for a single gene,
must have been grossly below that actually operative in his transformations, which
involve many linked genes. It was difficult to remove DNA-ase completely from the
system, and the chain length of the DNA must often have been shortened by enzymic
hydrolysis both before and after uptake by the pneumococcus. This, alongside
variability of competence factors, must have been largely responsible for the exasperat-
ing irreproducibility of the transformation reaction.
During this period and the early years after the identification of DNA as the
transforming factor, the lack of consistency in transformation experiments was a
continual source of frustration amongst workers on the problem. Indeed, inexplicable
`bad periods' still occur, at least with other transformation systems. `Many were the
times', Avery is quoted(31) as saying, `when we were ready to throw the whole thing
out of the window.'
Ideas prevalent 40 to 50 years previously, at a much less sophisticated level, were
now beginning to revive. But times were not yet ripe for a concerted attack by bio-
chemists on possible mechanisms for the biological replication of key molecules. The
problem had still not been properly broadcast.
But it had been defined-defined brilliantly and correctly-if not quite for the first


             The discovery of DNA                I3
time, at least for the first time in a manner that made an impact in terms that could
have been appreciated (even if they were not). This was done by J. B. S. Haldane in an
article for Hopkins' `festschrift'(42) published in 1937. Here, in passages which must
be quoted at length, not only is the problem properly defined, but the whole field of
molecular biology is outlined, emphasized and characterized-15 years or so before it
really became properly recognized.
Two possibilities are now open. The gene is a catalyst making a particular antigen [referring to
blood groups. M.R.P], or the antigen is simply the gene or part of it let loose from its connection
with the chromosome. For one essential property of the gene is that it reproduces its like at
each nuclear division. . Since a mutated gene is reproduced in its altered form it follows that
one gene is reproduced from another. This is an exceptional situation. [This point was origin-
ally stressed by Muller(z4) in rgzz. M.R.P.] A molecule of haemoglobin in a cell is not
derived from another similar molecule. If it were, slight changes in the molecule would be
perpetuated, and extra-nuclear inheritance would be as common as it is actually rare. But one
gene is derived from a like gene. As the gene is of the dimensions of a protein molecule and
does not consist of a number of similar parts, we cannot regard its reproduction as a process
of growth by accretion ending in division when a limiting size is reached.
It must, on the contrary, be a process of copying. The gene, considered as a molecule, must
be spread out in a layer one Baustein deep. Otherwise it could not be copied. The most likely
method of copying is by a process analogous to crystallization, a second similar layer of
Baustein being laid down on the first.
But we could conceive of a process analogous to the copying of a gramophone record by
the intermediation of a `negative' perhaps related to the original as an antibody to an antigen.
The process normally stops when one copy has been made, or at least the further copies are
not attached to the chromosome.
The whole problem of synthesis is an almost virgin field in biochemistry. And it is absolutely
fundamental. If genetics had done no more than pose the question in its sharpest form, it
would still be a valuable stimulant to biochemical research. But it has done a great deal more
than this. Whereas the classical biochemistry has largely been concerned in analysis of the
stages of catabolic processes such as the breakdown of carbohydrates to lactic acid or
alcohol and the digestion of proteins, the new brand of biochemistry which will, I believe,
arise from genetics, will be concerned largely with the stages of synthesis of such molecules as
chlorophyll and cyanin [i.e. macromolecules, such as proteins. M. R. P.] And its final goal will
be the explanation and control of the synthesis of genes.
Thus the rise of molecular biology was predicted almost two decades before it
began to make its real impact. It was a very remarkable piece of insight-though there
was still no mention of nucleic acids.
So I reach the last phase of my historical sketch: the bare decade between Avery and
Watson-Crick.
This was very far from a mopping-up period. It was of immense significance that the
specificity of the transforming agent had been shown to reside in DNA and not in
protein-though there was great reluctance by many, particularly chemists, to accept it.
Even in 1948, and succeeding years, Hotchkiss(43) was still having to argue fiercely
to support his exceedingly careful work eliminating the participation of trace amounts
of protein in the transformation phenomenon. However, with Hershey & Chase's(44)
demonstration in 1952 that bacteriophage left all (that is, experimentally, more than
g9 %) of their protein coat and other superficial `apparatus ' behind on infection of the
cell, it became very difficult still to maintain that nucleic acid was not the key substance
in the maintenance of genetic continuity.
In the period immediately after the Second World War it was still fashionable and
perfectly respectable, despite Avery's work, to consider proteins as the key self-


I4                    M. R. POLLOCK
replicating molecules, while in 1946 a chemist(45) could still argue that the specificity
of the transforming principle might lie in the polysaccharide molecule of the capsule
itself, acting as a specific primer (on analogy with the `directing' action of dextran in
biosynthesis of more dextran from sucrose) for further production, by a non-specific
enzyme, of the same type of polysaccharide.
It took another 15 years or so for most workers to realize that DNA was not just
another type of specificity but the origin, the fount, of all or most specificities : that all
heteropolymeric proteins derive their information from DNA and RNA and not vice
versa. Even Avery himself(4) leant over backwards to emphasize that showing the
role of DNA in pneumococcal transformation did not mean it was the key heredity
substance for all living systems! The attitude of most biologists at that very time could
be typified by Dubos(46), who, in 1945, giving a full and fair account of Avery's
discovery published only a few months previously, wrote: `Definition of their nature
(referring to competence factors) will eventually elucidate the mechanism of the
transformation and will, one may hope, provide a pattern for the analysis of the
phenomena of bacterial variability.' This was a restrained but perfectly reasonable
comment which, however, completely avoided any temptation (if, indeed, any tempta-
tion existed) to extrapolate the phenomenon of pneumococcal transformation to the
mechanism of heredity in general. Transforming DNA might explain some of those
curious variations that were continually cropping up in bacterial cultures; that is all.
There were, indeed, a number of misleading clues and confusing facts which delayed
progress.
Peter Walker(47) pointed out two of the most important of those red herrings. The
first were the ideas of the 1940s stemming mainly from some leading geneticists(48)
indicating that nuclear DNA was broken down to nucleotides and resynthesized,
possibly through RNA, during each cell division cycle. Despite many other facts
supporting Caspersson's theories on the vital role of nucleic acids in cell heredity, these
ideas served to implant considerable scepticism regarding genetic continuity of DNA.
The doubts were supported by the second of the red herrings which arose from the
apparent decrease in the ultraviolet absorption of the nucleus during telophase-an
observation which was in fact due to a big relative increase of the U.V. absorption in the
cytoplasm, from the synthesis of RNA, only later properly established by Brachet(491,
and accumulation of nucleotides therein, and did not represent any absolute loss of
nucleic acid from the nucleus.
However, during those days, other workers, in particular Chargaff and his colleagues
in New York, and Randall and his group (including, of course, Maurice Wilkins and
Rosalind Franklin) at King's College, London, had become interested in nucleic acids
(from a chemical and physical standpoint respectively) as large molecules having an
important biological activity. Their objectives were to try to discover, with the
greatly improved techniques then rapidly becoming available, the basis of the specificity
that must surely be present in the molecule. Unquestionably, one of the possibilities
envisaged was the sequence of nucleotides in the molecule.
But Chargaff(50) was well aware of the difficulties, pointing out that identity of
natural polymers is necessarily difficult because in many cases they will be `substances
that differ from each other in the sequence, not in the proportion, of their constituents'.
Up to this time-the late r94os-the only DNAs properly analysed for base composi-
tion were those from higher organisms where the G+C proportion of total base


             The discovery of DNA                15
present in the DNA in different species is now known to range no more than from 40
to 45%, in contrast with that in viruses and bacteria, which spreads from 25 to
75 %(51X
Since the ratios A/T and G/C must be unity in double-stranded DNA (and that
means practically all DNA), in DNAs where the G+C proportion of the total
`happened', so to speak, to be nearly 50 %, it follows that the proportions of all bases
must be approximately equal, and that, therefore, no variations between DNAs from
what were then, of course, considered to be widely differing sources, could possibly
emerge. One of the vital clues which led Watson & Crick to the correct solution of the
structure of the DNA double helix( 1) was therefore lacking until Chargaff and his
colleagues(52) started to analyse the DNA of yeast and tubercle bacilli in 1948/f+
The G + C content of DNA from these two micro-organisms are 36 y0 and from 62 to
70 y0 respectively of the total. This big difference thus highlighted the constant ratios
of near-unity found for A/T of 0.95 and for G/C of I-O.
Chargaff, though quick to spot a possible clue, was understandably reluctant to
push it too far and simply commented as follows at the end of his 1949 paper(52): `A
comparison of the molar proportions reveals certain striking, but perhaps meaningless,
regularities.' Further work(53) on DNA of Serratia marcescens, Bacillus schatz and
Haemophilus infuenzae showed analogous species differences and the same (approxi-
mate) relationship of A to T and G to C, despite big, overall differences in G + C Oh.
But an explanation had not been offered when two years later in 1951 Chargaff(54)
wrote : `As the number of examples of such regularity increases, the question will
become pertinent whether it is merely accidental or whether it is an expression of
certain structural principles that are shared by many deoxypentose nucleic acids,
despite far-reaching differences in their composition and the absence of a recognizable
periodicity in their nucleotide sequence.'
Others were also working on DNA base compositions, no doubt with the same idea
in mind, but they never got so far.
Mirsky's group(55) compared the pneumococcal transforming DNA with thymus
DNA and found a rather lower G + C y0 in the former. Although the A/T and G/C
ratios approached unity in both cases, no comment was made on their possible signifi-
cance. The vital point may here have been obscured by the large number of other base
compositions they analysed at the same time, mainly from animals, where approxi-
mately equi-molar proportions of the four bases would, of course, have been expected.
Wyatt(56) analysed the DNA of certain insect viruses and found G+C y0 values
varying at least twofold with A/T and G/C ratios all around unity but came to the
rather surprising conclusion that `no direct parallel can exist. . . between biological
relationship and DNA composition, since the groups having equal A +T/G + C ratios
include viruses as unlike as any examined'. This argument is difficult to understand if
he had conceived that a most likely, or even apossible, basis of DNA specificity was in
the nucleotide sequence rather than overall base composition. But, of course, it is easy
to forget that at that time there could have been no theories about the nature of the
DNA/protein code and that most people, in spite of Chargaff's warning, were probably
thinking in terms of gross differences both in composition and sequence.
It might be, and often has been, asked why Chargaff did not pursue his findings more
boldly. But in fact there were not then sufficient data available to go much further.
NO satisfactory techniques were available for sequencing nucleotides, and it needed a
   2                                                WIG 63


16                     M. R. POLLOCK
synthesis with the equally significant findings of Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin for the
true solution to emerge.

The base ratio part of the story contains, nevertheless, more than its fair share of the
irony in scientific discovery. No one yet knows why, so to speak, the DNA of all higher
organisms has a G + C content so close to 50 y0 of the total bases as to have obscured a
vital clue for so long and to have been at least partly responsible for persistence of the
balanced tetranucleotide hypothesis which long delayed progress in the chemistry of
DNA. There is no known molecular reason why this should be so, since bacteria and
viruses seem to get on very well with percentages of G + C ranging between 20 and 75.
Such a spread is quite consistent with what is known of the degeneracy of the nucleo-
tide/amino acid code. It is, however, difficult to believe that the use of the code, which
appears to be universal, and other factors which may contribute to the determination
of overall base composition, have no biological significance. At all events a major
piece of ill fortune seems here to have been involved.
On the other hand, it is very lucky that Chargaff did not begin his bacterial work
with Escherichiu coli (as most modern molecular biologists would assuredly have
done !). This species has a G + C content (50 to 52 %) not differing strikingly from that of
animals and plants and such an analysis, at that particular time, would perhaps have
so disappointed him and his colleagues that they might have concluded that there was
nothing to be found out in DNA by that approach and given it up. An important clue
might thus have been missed for even longer.

                          *    *    *
This short historical essay is, of course, a lamentably over-simplified account of a

fascinating and all-important advance in knowledge. But the story is not, I believe,
atypical of the sorts of factors that operate for many scientific discoveries. The
eccentricity of human personalities, their prejudices, their personal ambitions, their
unreason, combine it would seem with the vagaries of fortune to exert more influence
on the detailed short-term course of events than the cold force of logic.

Above all, it shows how extraordinarily difficult it is for people to accept new ideas
and thus how reluctant they are to try to do so-even though the ideas are simple,
clarifying and basically quite easy to understand if approached directly, from scratch,
so to speak, as a child would do. What a prison we seem to make of our own minds!

A striking instance of the slow permeation of a new concept is illustrated by the
inclusion, in a textbook published as recently as 1960(57>, of a diagram showing
Haurowitz's 1949 (then not unreasonable) hypothesis(58) on the mechanism of protein
self-replication by a direct copying process with itself as the template: an inclusion not
introduced as an historical curiosity but as an indication of the type of mechanism
which must be accepted as a serious contemporary possibility-with very little
emphasis on the Watson-Crick hypothesis for the mechanism of DNA replication and
all the evidence in support of it, as the fundamental process of biological replication.

`Great discoveries `, as Andre Lwoff puts it(59), `are dangerous.' They are often
hated because they require the immense emotional (and therefore intellectual) effort of
abandoning preconceived dogmata. And, because they are hated and feared, they are,
as Goethe himself pointed out, nearly always subjected to ridicule. In the present story
one particular instance, cited by Hotchkiss(31), occurred as late as 1954 at a sym-
posium on transformation in the United States where an eminent bacteriologist asked


             The discovery of DNA                 17
sardonically, but in all seriousness, whether the genetic activity of DNA was `based on
evidence or was merely a voting agreement'.
Even now there are still a few sceptics in the sense of those who suspect that perhaps
some (possibly biologically irrelevant) information can be supplied by proteins to
DNA and other polynucleotides-as they are being formed. I suspect they may even
be right. But very few would now say that such instances are common or very signifi-
cant, although some well-known voices (60) are still heard as recently as 1968 with
vitalistic and almost meaningless remarks such as:
Biologists have confronted successively-like a nest of Chinese boxes-levels of com-
plexity ranging from the eco-system to the internal chemistry of the cells. The last box has
been opened. According to the Watson-Crick theory, it should have contained the single
source of all the inherited specificity of the living organisms-DNA. It is my view that the
last box is empty and that the inherited specificity of life is derived from nothing less than
life itself.
There are, however, other sceptics of quite a different and much more interesting
and valuable type who try to look into the future and consider how our present ideas
may develop: those few who feel, like Pirie (himself one of the earliest workers to be
concerned in the biology of nucleic acids), that the mechanism of information replica-
tion may not be so exclusively centred on nucleic acids as is fashionably supposed at
the moment.
We may still be being misled by thinking we know more then we do-in a manner
analogous, as Pirie(61) puts it, to the card-player who `assumes that, although there
are 52 types of card, only he knows which ones are in his hand because there is only
one type of back to a card. He will fare badly when confronted with a card-sharper
who has marked the backs so that there are 52 types of back as well. We may be
victims of a similar subtlety when we discuss "information" transfer. . .for we have
no means of knowing that we know all the clues that exist. Accumulated biological
experience suggests that Nature is as subtle as any card-sharper.'
As a purely fanciful example, suppose we postulate the existence of some highly
specific, hitherto unrecognized, slim macromolecule that is in fact necessary for proper
replication of DNA (it could even be a type of natural DNA-replicating enzyme).
And we suppose that this substance undergoes an extremely slow sequence of chemical
changes that result in the `inaccurate' replication of DNA of a nature such as to lead to
a sequential series of modifications in the resultant proteins of a type that is biologically
significant to the species concerned-a substance, that is, having the property of a
directing entity responsible for non-Darwinian evolution. Well, such a hypothesis
would, quite reasonably, be rejected with impatience because not only is there no
evidence that an entity exists with such properties but [much more important) there is
no real needfor it at the moment.
Some time later on, when molecular biology becomes more complicated again, we
can be pretty sure that analogous `needs' will arise (probably in a very different context)
and some major reorientation will again be required of us. Just because it is practically
impossible to guess what this will be should not absolve us from realizing that it must
certainly occur. It should serve to keep our minds as clear as possible from too mono-
lithic and rigid assumptions.
In conclusion, it emerges that in the discovery of DNA there could be few more
contrasting pairs of personalities than, on the one hand, Watson and Crick, who were

                                                             2-2


18                     M. R. POLLOCK
prepared to stick their necks out and go well beyond the facts in a brilliant thrust of
insight, and, on the other hand, Avery and Griffith, who were, if anything, unreasonably
careful and almost too modest in their conclusions.

Both types of personality have their drawbacks and virtues, but in this instance what
seems to have been of really crucial importance was that they followed each other in the
right order: a matter of natural selection, of course, but still worth remembering as an
occurrence of critical significance.

Since more is heard of glamour stories and flamboyant personalities in the advance
of scientific knowledge than of the quiet workers and those long, tedious and super-
ficially unexciting experiments, with careful controls, that may be just as important, it
is well that we should also pay tribute to those who can do great work without noise.
And I can do no better than to conclude by quoting Rollin Hotchkiss's tribute(34) to
Avery: `When men and ideas rub against each other, the ideas receive maximal polish
if the man is gentle and his principles hard', because I think that applies equally
to Fred Griffith.

I am most grateful to Professor E. Chargaff, Mr N. W. Pirie, Professor P. M. B.
Walker and Professor M. F. H. Wilkins, who responded generously to my request for
information of a personal nature relevant to the more scientific part of this lecture.

I am also much indebted to former colleagues and friends of Fred Griffith who, by
providing first-hand glimpses of his life from their own recollections, enabled me to
give some sort of picture of his personality as a background to this story. These include
Dr V. D. Allison, Dr S. D. Elliott, Sir Graham Wilson, Mr W. R. Maxted and (very
particularly) his sister-in-law, Mrs Stanley Griffith, whose vigorous and vivid reminis-
cences of 30 years or more ago were invaluable and themselves unforgettable.

REFERENCES

(I) WATSON, J. D. (1968). The Double Helix. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
(2.) CHARGAFF, E. (1970). Personal communication.
(3) GRIFFITH, F. (192.8). The significance of pneumococcal types. Journal of Hygiene, Cambridge
  27, 113.

(4) AVERY, 0. T., MACLEOD, C. M. & MCCARTY, M. (1944). Studies on the chemical nature of the
  substance inducing transformation of pneumococcal types. I. Induction of transformation by a
  desoxyribonucleic acid fraction isolated from pneumococcus type III. Journal of Experimental
  Medicine 79, I 37.

(5) WATSON, J. D. & CRICK, F. H. C. (1953). Genetic implications of the structure of desoxyribo-
  nucleic acid. Nature, London 171, 964.

(6) WILKINS, M. F. H. (1970). Personal communication.
(7) Km, T. S. (1962). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
(8) MEDAWAR, P. B. (1968). Lucky Jim. New York Review, March 28, p. 3.
(9) WHITEHEAD, A. N., quoted by T. S. Kuhn (Ref. 7), without bibliographical reference.
(IO) ALLISON, V. D. (1970). Personal communication.
(I I) MIRSKY, A. E. (1968). The discovery of DNA. Scientific American, June, p. 78.
(12) OLBY, R. & POSNER, E. (1967). An early reference to genetic coding. Nature, London 215, 556.
(13) WILSON, E. B. (1896). Xke Cell in Development and Heredity. New York: Macmillan.
(14) WILSON, E. B. (1895). An Atlas of the Fertilization and Karyokinesis of the Ovum. New York:
   Macmillan.

(15) WUON, E. B. (1900). The Cell in Development and Heredity, 2nd edn. New York: Macmillan.
(16) Wuo~, E. B. (1925). The Cell in Development and Heredity, 3rd edn. New York: Macmillan.


            The discovery of DNA                19
(17) LEVENE, P. A. & BASS, L. W. (1931). Nucleic Acids (American Chemical Society Monograph
  Series). New York: Chemical Catalog Company Incorporated.
(18) HILL, L. R. (1966). An index to deoxyribonucleic acid base compositions of bacterial species.
  Journal of General Microbiology 44,419.
(19) JONES, W. (1914). Nucleic Acids. Monographs on Biochemistry. Edited by R. H. A. Plimmer and
  F. G. Hopkins. London: Longmans.
(20) HOPKINS, F. G. (1936). The influence of chemical thought on biology. Lecture at Harvard
  tercentenary conference on Arts and Sciences. Science, New York 84, 258.
(21) HOPKINS, F. G. (1938). Biological thought and chemical thought. A plea for unification. Linacre
  Lecture, published in Hopkins and Biochemistry, 1861-1947. Edited by J. Needham and E.
   Baldwin. Cambridge: W. Heffer and Sons.
(22) ELLIOTT, S. D. (1970). Personal communication.
(23) WILSON, G. S. (1970). Personal communication.
(24) MULLER, H. J. (rgzz). Variation due to change in the individual gene. American Naturalist 56, 32.
(25) NEIJFEL,D, F. & LEVINTHAL, W. (1928). Beitrlge zur Variabilittit der Pneumokokken. Zeitschrift
  fiir Immunitiitsforschung 55, 324.
(26) MAXTED, W. R. (1970). Personal communication.
(27) DAWSON, M. H. (1930). The transformation ofpneumococcal types. II. The interconvertibility of
  type-specific S pneumococci. Journal of Experimental Medicine 51, 123.
(28) DAWSON, M. H. & SIA, R. H. P. (1931). In vitro transformation of pneumococcal types. I. A
  technique for inducing transformation of pneumococcal types in vitro. II. Nature of the factor
  responsible for the transformation of pneumococcus types. Journal of Experimental Medicine54,
   681, 701.
(29) ALLOWAY, J. L. (1932). The transformation in vitro of R pneumococcus into S forms of different
  specific types by the use of filtered pneumococcus extracts. Journal of Experimental Medicine 55,
(30) /%OWAY, J. L. (1933). Further observations on the use of pneumococcus extracts in effecting
  transformation of type in vitro. Journal of Experimental Medicine 57, 265.
(31) HOTCHKISS, R. D. (1966). Genes, transforming principle and DNA. In Phage and the Origins of
   Molecular Biology, p. 180. Edited by J. Cairns, G. Stent and J. D. Watson. Cold Spring Harbor
   Laboratory of Quantitative Biology.
(32) BERRY, G. P. & DEDRICK, H. M. (1936). A method for changing the virus of rabbit fibroma
   (Shope) into that of infectious myxomatosis (Sanarelli). Journal of Bacteriology 31, 50.
(33) FENNER, F. (1968). The BioZogy of Animal Viruses, vol. I, p. 363 ff. New York: Academic Press.
(34) HOTCHKISS, R. D. (1965). 0. T. Avery. Genetics, Princeton 51, I.
(35) Pram, N. W. (1970). Personal communication.
(36) AVERY, 0. T. (rg32/3). The role of specific carbohydrates in pneumococcus infection and
   immunity. Annals of Internal Medicine 6, I.
  AVERY, 0. T. & GOEBEL, W. F. (1933). Chemo-immunological studies on the soluble specific
   substance of pneumococcus. I. The isolation and properties of the acetyl-polysaccharide of
  pneumococcus type I. Journal of Experimental Medicine 58, 73 I.
(37) MIRSKY, A. E. (1943) Chromosomes and Nucleoproteins. Advances in Enzymology 3, I.
(38) CASPERSSON, T. (1940). Methods for the determination of the absorption spectra of cell structures.
   Journal of the Royal Microscopical Society 60, 8.
  CASPERSSON, T. (1947). The relations between nucleic acid and protein synthesis. Symposia
   of the Society for Experimental Biology I, 127.
  SCHULTZ, J. (1941). The evidence of the nucleoprotein nature of the gene. Cold Spring Harbor
   Symposia on Quantitative Biology g, 55.
(39) GULLAND, J. M. (1947). Structures of nucleic acids. Symposia of the Society for Experimental
   Biology I, I.
(40) DARLINGTON, C. D. (1942). Chromosome chemistry and gene action. Nature, London 149, 66.
(41) ASTBURY, W. T. (1941). Protein and virus studies in relation to the problem of the gene. Pro-
   ceedings of the 7th International Genetics Congress, 1939, p. 49. Cambridge University Press.
  ASTBURY, W. T. (1947). X-ray studies of nucleic acids. Symposia of the Society for Experimental
   Biology I, 66.


20                       M. R. POLLOCK

(42) HALDANE, J. B. S. (1937). The biochemistry of the individual. In Perspectives in Biochemistry,
  p. I. Edited by J. Needham and D. E. Green. Cambridge University Press.
(43) HOTCHKISS, R. D. (1949). Etudes chimiques sur le facteur transformant du pneumocoque.
  Colloques Internationaux du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (Paris) 8, 57.
(44) HERSHEY, A. D. & CHASE, M. (1952). Independent functions of viral protein and nucleic acid in
  growth of bacteriophage. Journal of General Physiofogy 36, 39.
(45) STACEY, M. (1947). Bacterial nucleic acids and nucleoproteins. Symposia of the Society for
   Experimental Biology I, 86.
(46) DUBOS, R. (1945). The Bacterial Cell,p. r87.Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A: Harvard UniversityPress.
(47) WALKER, P. M. B. (1970). Personal communication.
(48) DARLINGTON, C. D. & MASHER, K. (1947). Elements of Genetics, chap. 7. London: Allen and
   Unwin.
(49) BRACHET, J. (1940). La detection histochimique des acides pentose-nucleiques. Comptes rendues
   de la So&% de Biologie 133, 88.
  BRACHET, J. (1947). Nucleic acids in the cell and the embryo. Symposia of the Society for Experi-
   mental Biology I, 207.
(50) CHARGAFF, E. (1950). Chemical specificity of nucleic acids and mechanism of their enzymatic
   degradation. Experientia 6, 201.
(51) SUEOKA, N. (1964). Compositional variation and heterogeneity of nucleic acids and protein in
   bacteria. In The Bacteria, vol. 5, chap. 9. Edited by 1. C. Gunsalus and R. Y. Stanier. New York
   and London: Academic Press.
(52) VISCHER, E., ZAMENHOF, S. & CHARGAFF, E. (1949). Microbial nucleic acids: the desoxypentose
   nucleic acids of avian tubercle bacilli and yeast. Journal of Biological Chemistry 177, 429.
(53) ZAMENHOF, S., BREWERMAN, G. & CHARGAFF, E. (1952). On the desoxypentose nucleic acids from
   several micro-organisms. Biochimica et Biophysics Acta g, 402.
(54) CHARGAFF, E., LIPSHITZ, R., GREEN, C, & HODES, M. E. (1951). The composition of desoxyribo-
   nucleic acid of salmon sperm. Journal of Biological Chemistry xgz, 223.
(55) DALY, M. M., ALFREY, V. G. & MIRSKY, A. E. (1950). Purine and pyrimidine contents of some
   desoxypentose nucleic acids. Journal of General Physiology 33,497.
(56) WYATT, G. R. (1952). The nucleic acids of some insect viruses. Journal of General Physiology 36,
    201.
(57) PICKEN, L. (1960). The Organization of Cells and Other Organisms, p. 17. Oxford: Clarendon
    Press.
(58) HAUROWITZ, F. (1949). Biological problems and immunochemistry. Quarterly Review of Biology
    24, 93.
(59) LWOFF, A. (1955). Control and interrelations of metabolic and viral diseases of bacteria. Harvey
   Lectures, series L (1954-55), p. 92. New York: Academic Press.
(60) COMMONER, B. (1968). Failure of the Watson-Crick theory as a chemical explanation of inheri-
   tance. Nature, London 220, 334.
(61) PIRI& N. W. (1966). Biological organization of viruses. In Ciba Foundation Symposium on
   Principles of Biomolecular Organizations, p. 136. Edited by G. E. W. Wolstenholme and M.
   O'Connor. London: 5. and A. Churchill.

