MY FLAGSTAFF TALKS

PART   I: Panel-Discussion Talk:
          Why quantum theory is necessary to explain Consciousness.    
PART  II: Talk on Ontology: 
          How thought can influence action:  
          The tripartite structure of brain process.
PART III: Answering Chalmers' Queries on Quantum Ontology.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Part I
Panel Discussion Topic:

"Are quantum approaches necassary to explain consciousness?"

Panelists: Chalmers, Hameroff, Klein, Stapp.
Date: July 29, 1999.  

My (10 minute) talk: "Why quantum theory is necessary to explain consciousness.

1. Our culture encourages us to believe a fairy tale: 
   "The world is made of Tiny Bits of Matter".

2. This notion, though useful in many practical ways, is fundamentally false.
 
3. It fails in two important ways:
    
      It cannot explain the properties of the Tiny Bits of Matter; and
 
      It cannot explain the CAUSAL properties of Our Conscious Thoughts.

4. But scientists have created a theory that CAN explain these things:
      ORTHODOX QUANTUM THEORY.(i.e., von Neumann/Wigner quantum theory)

5. According to this theory---which reproduces all the validated predictions
   of the earlier classical theory---the world is built NOT out of tiny bits 
   of matter but rather out of tiny bits of knowledge: 

      The objective physical world is an evolving state of knowledge 
      that is a "compendium" of subjective  knowings. 
      

6. This switch to a knowledge-based physical theory has important
    ramifications not only for atomic physics, but also for the 
    CAUSAL PROPERTIES OF CONSCIOUSNESS. 

---------------------------------------------------------------
I give three reasons why quantum theory is needed to explain consciousness.

(1) QT PROVIDES A NEEDED LOGICAL CONNECTION: Quantum theory specifies a 
    LOGICAL CONNECTION between CONSCIOUSNESS and BRAIN that classical 
    physical theory lacks. This lacuna renders classical physical theory 
    unable to EXPLAIN the facts of consciousness: 
    they are, conceptually, EXTRA FACTS.
    
(2) QT AVOIDS EPIPHENOMENALISM: Taking the classical approximation 
    (i.e., setting Planck's Constant equal to zero) CAUSES EPIPHENOMENALISM: 
    it converts our thoughts, which are causally efficacious in orthodox 
    quantum theory---with Planck's constant having its true physical value---
    to causally impotent slaves of locally deterministic aspects of nature.

(3) QT CAN ACCOUNT FOR PHENOMENAL REPORTS: Quantum theory can provide a 
    NATURAL CAUSAL EXPLANATION of 
    OUR VERBAL REPORTS OF OUR CONSCIOUS EXPERIENCES,
    whereas classical physical theory cannot.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reason #1:  QT PROVIDES A NEEDED LOGICAL CONNECTION.

Major advances in science usually involve creating a LOGICAL CONNECTION
between related phenomena that had formerly been regarded as LOGICALLY
DISTINCT. Witness: Celestial and Terrestial Dynamics; Heat and Motion;
Elecromagnetism and Light; Space and Time; Spacetime and Gravity; 
Mass and Energy; Particles and Waves. 

Chalmers has emphasized that EXPLANATION, being in terms of concepts, 
demands a conceptual (i.e., logical) connection.

vN/W quantum theory gives such a connection:

The PHYSICAL WORLD is an OBJECTIVE COMPENDIUM of 
SUBJECTIVE KNOWINGS.

Hence, given the full history of the evolution of the physical
world, all of the individual increments that feed into the
growing accumulation of these increments are determined.

But in classical physical theory consciousness does not 
`logically supervene' in this way on the physical. 

Hence any EXPLANATION of the facts of consciousness must go OUTSIDE classical 
physical theory: psycho-physical laws must be ADDED. [There is no conceivable 
way to explain the "greeness" of a green experience exclusively in terms of 
the geometric facts and laws that, according to the precepts of classical 
physical theory, completely characterize and define the physical aspect of 
nature.]

Quantum theory resolves this problem of logical disjunction by unifying 
the two great categories of philosophy, Ontology and Epistemology: 
What Exists is Knowledge!

If one must go OUTSIDE classical physical theory, and bring consciousness
into physical theory in a logically coherent way, then quantum 
theory is obviously the right way to go: QT has already replaced CM as the 
basic physical theory, and has been extensively tested as regards logical and 
mathematical coherence. It encompasses all of the valid predictions of the
classical physical theory that it replaced, and it fits all empirical data 
up the presently achievable limits of empirical and theoretical precision.
----------------------------------------------------------------

Reason #2: QT AVOIDS EPIPHENOMENALISM.  Quantum theory allows consciousness 
to be causally efficacious, whereas setting Planck's Constant to zero renders
consciousness causally impotent, as regards its effects on the physical. 

Science seeks CAUSAL EXPLANATIONS.
   
   Kepler DESCRIBED the orbits, but Newton EXPLAINED them CAUSALLY.
     
   Leibniz accused Newton of of resorting to "mysticism", because
   he did not EXPLAIN the CAUSE of his action-at-a-distance gravity'
   
   Newton offered (feigned) no hypothesis about the cause, 
   but insisted that there was a cause:

   "...that one body should act upon another at a distance through a vacuum, 
    without the mediation of anything else, by and though which their
    action and force may be conveyed from one to the other, is to me so 
    great an absurdity, that I believe no man, who has in philosophical
    matters a competent faculty of thinking, can ever fall into it. 
    Gravity must be caused by an agent acting constantly according to certain 
    laws; but whether this agent be material or immaterial, I have left to the 
    consideration of my readers." 

   Einstein succeeded in giving such a CAUSAL EXPLANATION of gravity. 

Science seeks CAUSAL EXPLANATIONS. 
 
   But Chalmers shows that IF ONE ACCEPTS THE PRECEPTS OF CLASSICAL 
   PHYSICS, then

     "Any view that takes consciousness seriously will at least have to
      face up to a limited form of EPIPHENOMENALISM."

     "Epiphenomenalism may be counterintuitive, but it is not obviously
      false, so IF A SOUND ARGUMENT FORCES IT ON US we should accept it.
      Of course, a counterintuitive conclusion may give us reason to
      go back and reexamine the argument, but we will NEED TO FIND
      SOMETHING WRONG WITH THE ARGUMENT on independent grounds.

    Is anything wrong with the argument?

    Well how about the PREMISE that classical theory is adequate
    to deal with the mind-brain connection?
    
    This PREMISE constitutes a gigantic extrapolation from a domain
    where the conscious observer stands OUTSIDE the system being studied
    to the case where the observer IS the system being studied.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

REASON #3. QT CAN ACCOUNT FOR PHENOMENAL REPORTS:
   Quantum theory can give a NATURAL CAUSAL EXPLANATION of 
   VERBAL REPORTS OF OUR CONSCIOUS EXPERIENCES,
   whereas classical physical theory cannot.

   Consider (following Searle) the following sequence of events:

           You  hit your finger with a hammer.
           Nerve impulses carry a message to your brain.
           Your come to know that a painful experience is occurring.
           You initiate a verbal report:

     "I am consciously examining my feelings and am able to report, 
      truthfully. on the basis of this introspection that I know that 
      a feeling of a painful finger now exists.
 
     Science seeks CAUSAL EXPLANATIONS.
      
     To explain causally this verbal report, I propose the following 

     "CAUSAL HYPOTHESIS": 
     
      The pain CAUSES---or at least causally influences---
                  the verbal report of the pain.
      
     If a news reporter truthfully reports the occurrence of an event
     then a scientific account of the relationship of that event to the report
     of that event requires the existence of a causal chain that conveys the
     information about that event to the report of that event.
     
     But this CAUSAL HYPOTHESIS `conflicts' with the ASSUMED adequacy
     of classical physical theory in mind-brain research:
   
     Classical physical theory asserts that there is causal explanation of 
     the connection of the `hitting of the finger' to the `reporting 
     of the pain' in physical terms alone.

     But then the CAUSAL HYPOTHESIS entails the existence 
     TWO *different* causal explanations of this connection:
      
     One in physical terms alone, as required by classical physics;
            
     The other involves the pain itself, as required by the causal hypothesis.

     Chalmers' arguments show that, within classical physical theory, these 
     two causal explanations are not logically equivalent --- i.e., they not 
     mere restatements of the same connection in different terms, such as the 
     microscopic and macroscopic descriptions of a classically describable 
     hurricane.
    
     Chalmers recognizes this causal overdetermination to be a serious problem,
     
 He notes that it can be resolve by either: 

     (1) REJECTING THE `CAUSAL HYPOTHESIS'; or

     (2) EMBRACING what is ESSENTIALLY THE QUANTUM APPROACH of taking 
     consciousness, not matter, to be basic.


But ACCEPTING the CAUSAL HYPOTHESIS is surely more sensible,  as a guide 
to scientific research, than accepting a gigantic  extrapolation of 
KNOWN-TO-BE-FALSE classical physical theory into a fundamentally new domain.

That is, it is far more reasonable, from a scientific perspective, 
to EMBRACE the BASIC physical theory and retain the CAUSAL HYPOTHESIS, 
than to REJECT the CAUSAL HYPOTHESIS 
in order preserve a fundamentally false theory. 
------------------------------------------------------------------
PART II: My Ontology Talk.


%REPORTMASTER (revised 8/24/88)
\documentstyle[12pt]{article}
\input math_macros.tex
\def\baselinestretch{1.2}
\begin{document}

HOW THOUGHT CAN INFLUENCE ACTION:\\
THE TRIPARTITE STRUCTURE OF BRAIN PROCESS\\
 
ACCORDING TO QUANTUM THEORY THE PHYSICAL WORLD
IS A REPRESENTATION OF KNOWLEDGE.\\

 Hendry says:\\
\sc{ ``Dirac, in discussion, insisted on the
restriction of the theory's application to our knowledge of a system,
and on its lack of ontological content."  Hendry summarized the
concordance by saying: ``On this interpretation it was agreed that, as
Dirac explained, the wave function represented our knowledge of the
system, and the reduced wave packets our more precise knowledge after
measurement."


Heisenberg (1958a): ``The conception of objective reality of the
elementary particles has thus evaporated not into the cloud of some
obscure new reality concept but into the transparent clarity of a
mathematics that represents no longer the behavior of particles but
rather our knowledge of this behavior."

Heisenberg (1958b): ``...the act of registration of the result in the
mind of the observer.  The discontinuous change in the probability
function...takes place with the act of registration, because it is the
discontinuous change in our knowledge in the instant of registration
that has its image in the discontinuous change of the probability
function."

Heisenberg (1958b:) ``When the old adage `Natura non facit saltus' is 
used as a basis of a criticism of quantum theory, we can reply that
certainly our knowledge can change suddenly, and that this fact
justifies the use of the term `quantum jump'. "  

Wigner (1961): ``the laws of quantum mechanics cannot be
formulated ... without recourse to the concept of consciousness."


Bohr (1934): ``In our description of nature the purpose is not to
disclose the real essence of phenomena but only to track down as far
as possible relations between the multifold aspects of our
experience.

-----------------------------------------------------------

"Einstein never accepted the Copenhagen interpretation. He said: 

``What does not satisfy me, from the standpoint of principle, is its
attitude toward what seems to me to be the programmatic aim of all
physics: the complete description of any (individual) real situation
(as it supposedly exists irrespective of any act of observation or
substantiation)." (Einstein, 1951, p.667)

and 

``What I dislike in this kind of argumentation is the basic
positivistic attitude, which from my view is untenable, and which
seems to me to come to the same thing as Berkeley's principle, esse
est percipi."  (Einstein, 1951, p.  669).[Translation: To be is to be
perceived]

Einstein struggled until the end of his life to get the observer's
knowledge back out of physics.  But he did not succeed!  Rather he
admitted that: 

``It is my opinion that the contemporary quantum
theory...constitutes an optimum formulation of the [statistical]
connections."  (ibid.  p. 87).  

He referred to: 

``the most successful physical theory of our period, viz., the
statistical quantum theory which, about twenty-five years ago took on
a logically consistent form.  ... This is the only theory at present
which permits a unitary grasp of experiences concerning the quantum
character of micro-mechanical events." (ibid p. 81).  
\newpage
THREE PROBLEMS WITH COPENHAGEN QUANTUM THEORY;\\
(1) MERELY A SET OF RULES.\\
(2) QUANTUM SYSTEM IS SMALL, AND DISCONNECTED FROM BRAINS.\\
(3) NO DESCRIPTION OF THE MEDIATING SYSTEM.\\

VON NEUMANN/WIGNER QUANTUM THEORY.\\
(1) THE ENTIRE PHYSICAL UNIVERSE IS THE QUANTUM SYSTEM.\\
(2) EACH SUBJECTIVE `KNOWING' IS ASSOCIATED WITH A BRAIN.\\
(3) EACH SUBJECTIVE `KNOWING' REDUCES THE STATE OF ASSOCIATED BRAIN
    TO A FORM COMPATIBLE WITH THAT `KNOWING'.\\
(4) THIS REDUCTION AUTOMATICALLY REDUCES THE STATE OF THE UNIVERSE
    TO A FORM COMPATIBLE WITH THAT `KNOWING'.

-------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TWO ROLES OF THE OBSERVER.

Niels Bohr (1951, p.223), in recounting the important events at the 
Solvay Conference of 1927, says:

``On that occasion an interesting discussion arose also about how to speak 
of the appearance of phenomena for which only predictions of a statistical 
nature can be made. The question was whether, as regards the occurrence of
individual events, we should adopt the terminology proposed by Dirac,
that we have to do with a choice on the part of `nature' or, as suggested 
by Heisenberg, we should say that we have to do with a choice on the part
of the `observer' constructing the measuring instruments and reading their
recording.''

Bohr stressed this choice on part of the observer:

``...our possibility of handling the measuring instruments allow us only
to make a choice between the different complementary types of phenomena
we want to study.''

The observer in quantum theory does more than just read the recordings. 
He also chooses which question will be put to Nature: which aspect of nature 
his inquiry will probe. I call this important function of the observer 
`The Heisenberg Choice', to contrast it with the `Dirac Choice', which is 
the random choice on the part of Nature that Dirac emphasized. 

According to quantum theory, the Dirac Choice is a choice between alternatives
that are specified by the Heisenberg Choice: the observer must first specify 
what aspect of the system he intends to measure or probe, and then put in 
place an instrument that will probe that aspect. 

In  quantum theory it is the observer who both poses the question, and 
recognizes the answer. Without some way of specifying what the question is, 
the quantum rules will not work: the quantum process grinds to a halt.\\

-------------------------------------------------------------------

In the Copenhagen formulation the Heisenberg choice was made by the mind 
of the external human observer. In the vN/W formulation this choice 
is not made by the local deterministic Schroedinger process nor by the 
global stochastic Dirac process. So there is still an essential need
for a third process, the Heisenberg process. Thus the agent's mind can 
continue to play its key role. But the mind of the human agent is now an 
integral part of the dynamical body/brain/mind. We therefore have, now, 
an intrinsically more complex dynamical situation, one in which a 
person's conscious thoughts can --- and evidently must, if no new 
element is brought in, --- play a role that is not reducible to the 
combination of the Schroedinger and Dirac processes.

\newpage

THE TRIPARTITE PROCESS:\\
(1) SCHROEDINGER EVOLUTION.\\
(2) HEISENBERG PROCESS. (POSES THE QUESTION)\\
(3) DIRAC PROCESS. (ANSWERS THE QUESTION)\\

I IDENTIFY THE "POSING OF THE QUESTION" WITH ``ATTENTION'':\\
WHAT QUESTION IS ``ATTENDED TO''?\\

IT IS NOT CONTROLLED BY SCHROEDINGER OR DIRAC PROCESS.
}
\end{document}


Overhead Projector--- Diagram



        -----------                                          -----------
     -->|         |INTENTION----------------------->ATTENTION|          |-->
        | KNOWING |                                          | KNOWING  | 
        |         |                                          |          |
     -->|         |-----------SCHROEDINGER------------------>|          |-->
        ----------\                                           -----------\
                   \                                                      \
                    \-------------MOTOR--------->

 The top line represents the Heisenberg process that acts directly in
 the experiential realm, and poses, on the basis of the intention
 of the earlier knowing (conscious thought) the question associated
 with the second knowing.

 The Schroedinger evolution generates, via evolution of the brain state
 actualized by the earlier knowing, the potentialities for the second
 knowing, but quantum uncertainties cause a diffuse set of potentialities.
 The posings of the questions can focus the physical process!

Can Mere` Choice of The Question Posed' Influence the Dynamics?

The example of the Quantum Zeno Effect shows that the answer is YES!

Asking the right questions can focus the quantum brain process!

This dynamics is formulated completely WITHIN the quantum rules: 

There is NO BIASING of the Quantum Statistical Rules 
   that govern the Dirac Choice!.

Any such baising would destroy the tight consistency of quantum theory!
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

PART III

Discussion with Chalmers about this Quantum Ontology.

One of Chalmers' question can be posed as follows:

Is this ontology an idealistic monism or an interactive dualism?

Answer: Both!

Fundamentally it is an idealistic monism: all elements are idea-like.

But there are TWO DIFFERENT knowledge-like aspects:
    (1) The subjective knowings.
    (2) The evolving objective state of knowledge, which is
         the accumulation of the subjective knowings.

The evolution of the objective state of knowledge, which is the physical
aspect of nature, proceeds via an "interaction" with the subjective
aspects via accumulation. 

Chalmers asks: What about the Hilbert space vector? It REPRESENTS
the evolving state of absolute or objective knowledge. But what is its
ontological status?   

I distinguish between `pragmatic approach' and `ontological approach'.
In the pragmatic approach it is recognized, explicitly, that 
theoretical constructs are ideas that we use to represent to ourseves
our IDEA of something, such as "what exists objectively
outside of the conscious experience of any single person, and outside
of the collection of what is being consciously experienced now by all 
human beings, and outside of what has been, over the course of history,
consciously experienced by human beings."  vN/W QT can be conservatively
interpreted in this pragmatic way. vN/W QT, pragmatically interpreted,
is a viable foundation for the study of the connection between 
human consciousness and human brains: it provides a theoretical
model of the two-way causal connection between human thoughts/knowings 
and human brains. Ontological issues are thereby avoided. The ontolgical
issues are not of *immediate* relevance to this research. 

In the ontological approach one assumes that the theoretical representation
of the objective world is in close correspondence with some really
existing aspect of nature: i.e.,  the objective vN/W state of the
universe "really exists", in some sense, outside of our human thoughts.

Chalmers suggested that there could be no ontological reality that
was `the evolving state of knowledge' because at the beginning of time,
before the first knowing, there was no knowledge. But perhaps there is no
beginning. (e.g., as in a steady state universe, or if there is an 
infinite sequence of big bangs followed by big crunches). Or perhaps 
there is co-evolution of knowing and being from simpler 
proto-knowing and proto-being. The essential difference between
classical and quantum theory is that the classical theory is based on
enduring matter-energy, whose beginnings are a problem, whereas
quantum theory is based on information, which can more naturally
emerge from humble beginnings, both as regards creation and storage.


Chalmers noted that whereas I focussed on classical physical theory, and
its contrast with orthodox quantum theory, his argument really did not single
out classical physical theory in contrast to quantum theory: the important
question was whether or not consciousness supervened on the physical, and
that question cuts across the quantum-classical divide. 

It is true that the question can be posed on both sides of the divide.
But the answers on the two sides differ.

Chalmers' actual arguments were based on the language and concepts
of classical physical theory, in which the physical aspect of
nature is ontologically complete. But the physical aspect is not
ontologically complete in quantum theory

The point is subtle, but the physical aspect of QT is incomplete  
because that aspect is not dynamically/causally complete.

Chalmers tries to avoid the causality aspect. This is possible
in the classical idealization because consciousness (i.e ., the subjective
knowing aspect) plays no causal role in the evolution of the physical 
(i.e., the objective being) aspect. The objective part is 
dynamically/causally complete, and the subjective part just knows
what the objective part is doing. This it becomes "unnatural" to say
that two knowings could differ if that which is known is the same:
consciousness "supervenes" on the physical. But it would be unreasonable
to hold, in the classical case, that if one were to leave out half the
particles that complete knowledge of the retained half completely determines
the left-out half.
  
But in vN/W QT the subjective knowing aspect plays an essential role in 
the dynamics. It is not clear that a given collapse can be caused only
by one unique thought: the collapse is specified by a projection 
operator (e.g., the pointer lies between 6 and 7 on the dial.) But 
many different experiences might be represented by this projection
operator.  

Yet, indeed, Chalmers' arguments do apply equally well to all the forms of
quantum theory in which "the physical" is related to consciousness in
essentially the same way as in classical physical theory: his
arguments DO cover those forms of quantum theory in which one tries to
follow classical ideas and keep conscious out of our scientific
description of nature.  The important distinction is INDEED between 
classical-type theories in which "the physical" does not logically,
or conceptually entail consciousness, and theories like vN/W QT that 
make consciousness both dynamically essential and not determined 
by the physical ALONE, plus chance.
    
Chalmers says that his approach is not epiphenomenalism.
He suggests, in somewhat vague terms, some ways that epiphenomenalism
might possibly be avoided. But his suggestions all involve giving up the
normal concepts of classical physical theory, with its idea of strict
deterministic causation by means of physical CONTACTS that MAKE the 
next event or situation happen, and with its exclusion of any conscious 
underpinning to the physical entities and properties. 

These normal classical physical  concepts were the basis of Chalmers' 
arguments that, in classical physical theory, consciousness does not 
supervene on the physical. 

But I believed that Chalmers has not successfully evaded epiphenomenalism,
staying within the strict confines of classical physical theory
as it is normally conceived.

Yet if one is going to look beyond classical physical theory, then the 
first thing to try is the alternative that physicists have already
discovered and worked out, and that accounts for all the valid predictions
of classical physical theory, and that APPEARS to be pertinent, namely 
vN/W QT. Indeed, Chalmers' positive suggestions
(e.g., in his section "Strategies for avoiding epiphenomenalism") 
all seem to point in that direction.

----------------------------------------------------------------





