DISSENTING STATEMENT OF
COMMISSIONER ROBERT M. MCDOWELL
Re: The Commission’s Cable Horizontal and Vertical Ownership Limits; Implementation of Section 
11 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992; Implementation of 
Cable Act Reform Provisions of the Telecommunications Act of 1996; Review of the 
Commission’s Regulations Governing Attribution of Broadcast and Cable/MDS Interests; Review 
of the Commission’s Regulations and Policies Affecting Investment in the Broadcast Industry; 
Reexamination of the Commission’s Cross-Interest Policy.
What we have before today us may be the “Ghost of Christmas Past.”  Almost seven years ago, 
the court rejected the FCC’s attempt to impose a 30 percent cable ownership cap.  So what is the majority 
doing today?  It’s sending back up to the very same court the very same 30 percent cap.  Maybe this is 
really the “Ghost of Christmas Present” then.  In Charles Dickens’ tale, “A Christmas Carol,” that ghost 
carried the specters of “Ignorance” and “Want.” Today’s order does the same.  This order goes out of its 
way to remain ignorant of current market conditions which obviate a need for a cap.  And the order is 
wanting for any sustainable legal or evidentiary justification to trample on the First Amendment, in 
defiance of the court’s 2001 warning.  Certainly, the ghost of the future will foretell an inescapable fate 
for this order.  Its dark, cold epitaph is all but carved on its tomb.  This order will be overturned by the 
D.C. Circuit.  Even Ebeneezer Scrooge would pry a few coins from his miserly hands to place that bet.
My dissent is focused on three primary concerns:
1) The cap is out-of-date, is bad public policy and is not needed in today’s market;
2) The court is sure to strike down the cap again; and 
3) The cap is contrary to the existing policy goals of this Commission by creating regulatory 
disparity and asymmetry.
I. The Cap Is Out-of-Date.
In 1992, Congress authorized the Commission, through Section 613, to “prescribe rules and 
regulations establishing reasonable limits on the number of cable subscribers a person is authorized to 
reach” in order to prevent any “cable operator or group of cable operators” from “unfairly imped[ing]… 
the flow of video programming from the video programmer to the consumer.”1 In instructing the 
Commission to craft these rules, however, Congress was clear that the Commission must “make sure such 
rules and regulations reflect the dynamic nature of the communications marketplace” and must not 
“impose limitations which would impair the development of diverse and high quality video 
programming.” 2 Congress also required the Commission to “take particular account of the market 
structure” of the cable industry and “account for any efficiencies and other benefits that might be gained 
through increased ownership.”3
When Congress enacted this section, vertical integration between cable operators and 
programmers was at about 57 percent, which sparked legitimate concerns regarding potential exclusion of 
independent programmers by cable companies.  In contrast, vertical integration today stands at less than 
15 percent.  The unwritten story here is that, back then, fewer than 100 national programming networks 
existed; now there are about 550.  That’s more diversity, not less.
In 1992, the average consumer had a “choice” of only one subscription video provider.  Today, 
  
1 47 U.S.C. § 533(f)(1)(A), (f)(2)(A).
2 Id. at § 533(f)(2)(E), (f)(2)(G).
3 Id. at § 533(f)(2)(C)-(D).
the average consumer has a choice of at least three such providers, and sometimes five.  In 2001, when 
the court last looked at the cap, DirecTV and Echostar had a combined 16 million subscribers with an 18 
percent market share.  Today, they serve over 30 million consumers and have grown to a 30 percent 
market share.  These two companies are now the second and third largest subscription video service 
providers.  DirecTV is now 54 percent bigger, and Echostar is 92 percent bigger.  In the meantime, 
cable’s video subscribership is 4 percent smaller.
And there are other differences.  In 1992 and 2001, phone companies were not in the video 
business.  Now they are - big time.  For instance, Verizon alone has almost 1 million video subscribers.  
Cable overbuilders are much more viable as well.  In 1992, there was no public Internet, let alone Internet 
video.  Today there is so much Internet video, that YouTube alone requires more bandwidth than the 
entire Internet did in 2000.  And that’s not counting new ventures such as Joost, Cinema Now, Movielink 
and others that allow consumers to avoid traditional subscription video paradigms altogether.  In fact, as 
the FCC’s own research shows, by July 2006, 107 million Americans viewed video online and about 60 
percent of U.S. Internet users download videos.4 Furthermore, today’s video market will only become 
more competitive as broadcasters beam new HDTV and multi-cast video programming, over-the-air, for
free, and as wireless providers build out powerful new platforms using our recently-auctioned Advanced 
Wireless Services spectrum and the 700 MHz spectrum being auctioned next month.
This order is unnecessary because the bottleneck threat to programming distribution that existed 
in 1992 no longer exists.  Deregulatory policies have spurred new investment and competition in the 
marketplace.  As a result, new delivery platforms and new content providers have sprouted up, 
supplanting the need for regulation.  However, should a programmer find that a cable operator is unfairly 
excluding its content from carriage, and all other private sector avenues for resolution have failed, then 
the statute and our regulations allow that programmer to pursue a complaint here at the Commission.  But, 
to date, only two such complaints have been filed—which underscores the point that the majority is 
concocting an unconstitutional cure for an illness that does not exist.  If a viewer wants specific 
programming not carried by a cable operator, the viewer and the programmer both have a panoply of 
ways to find each other – certainly more than they had in 1992 or 2001.  In short, other less heavy-handed 
alternatives exist to address the majority’s concerns without having to resort to such archaic industrial 
policy.  
II. The Cap Is Sure to Be Struck Down Again by the Court.
Today’s 30 percent cap has a smaller chance of surviving appeal than did the ill-fated and ill-
advised 2001 30 percent cap.   In 2001 in Time Warner Entertainment Co. v. FCC, the D.C. Circuit 
rejected the 30 percent cable ownership cap and imposed a heavy burden on the Commission to adopt any 
new cap on remand.5 The court found that the Commission lacked an evidentiary basis for a 30 percent 
cap and, as a result, did not meet its obligation under the First Amendment to show a “real risk” of “non-
conjectural harm” to programmers.  The court also rejected the Commission’s argument that a 30 percent 
cap was justified in order to “enhance diversity.”
Indeed, the court stated that based on the marketplace evidence in 2001, the Commission could 
justify at most, a 60 percent cap—twice the number the majority adopts today.6 Specifically, the court 
maintained that a 60 percent limit “might be appropriate as necessary to ensure that programmers had an 
adequate ‘open field’ even in the face of rejection by the largest company” and that the “present record 
supports no more.”  In particular, the court found that the Commission had not given sufficient weight to 
  
4 News Release, FCC, FCC Adopts 13th Annual Report to Congress on Video Competition and Notice of Inquiry for 
the 14th Annual Report 4 (Nov. 27, 2007).
5 Time Warner Entertainment Co. v. FCC, 240 F.3d 1126, 1134 (D.C.Cir. 2001).
6 Id. at 1136. 
marketplace developments, especially the increasing success of Direct Broadcast Satellite (“DBS”). The 
court pointed out that because “DBS could be considered to ‘pass every home in the country’” its 
competitive effect is especially significant.  The Court admonished the Commission to account for this 
fact when considering any new ownership cap. The majority’s order does not clear this hurdle, not by a 
mile.  How can the same 30 percent limit that insufficiently accounted for DBS in 2001 possibly satisfy 
the requirements of Time Warner II today when DBS is roughly twice as large a competitive presence as 
it was in 2001, and when other competitors are competing vigorously with cable operators? The answer 
is that it cannot.
III. The Cap Creates Regulatory Disparity and Asymmetry.
Placing a horizontal ownership cap on cable creates regulatory disparity and asymmetry, all at a 
time when this Commission has been trying to level the regulatory playing field by creating parity. Order 
after order over the past few years has sought to change the stove-pipe paradigm of old in an attempt to 
treat similar technologies and services alike, not differently.  Today’s cap applies only to cable, not to 
satellite.  Furthermore, we don’t cap the number of:
· wireline telephone subscribers one company can have; 
· wireless subscribers one company can have; or 
· websites a company can own.  
Even in the era of rapid technological convergence, such asymmetry will only create market 
distortions that will inhibit investment and innovation.  How does that serve the public interest?  In a 
world where cable companies compete directly against telephone companies and others to provide video, 
voice and data services, restricting the ability of one group of competitors to achieve the economies of 
scale enjoyed by others undermines years of efforts to spur intermodal competition and violates the well-
established principle of competitive neutrality.  If the majority sees so many flaws in the cable industry, it 
should remedy those shortcomings by encouraging competition, as we did with our video franchising 
order, not through unnecessary and unconstitutional regulation.  Likewise, it is ironic that those who are 
voting today to limit cable company growth have consistently voted to expand telephone company 
growth. Such a reversal of policy just for this one sector defies logic.
IV. Conclusion.
Today’s item also contains a further notice of proposed rulemaking, seeking comments regarding 
the cable attribution rules and the vertical ownership limit. While I am not opposed to asking questions 
about the attribution issues, the answers will make little sense with the 30 percent horizontal ownership 
cap in place.  I hope that our consideration of the vertical limit will be far better-reasoned than today’s 
action.
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent from today’s order.
