SBIR/STTR 2001-1

National Aeronautics and Space Administration



SMALL BUSINESS
INNOVATION RESEARCH (SBIR)
&
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER (STTR)

Program Solicitations


Opening Date: March 28, 2001
Closing Date: June 6, 2001





An electronic version of this document
is located at: http://sbir.nasa.gov








Cover: The TransHab inflatable living quarters is shown under test at NASA’s Johnson Space Center for potential 
utilization by the International Space Station, as shown in the inset. Cover layout: Dr. James Kalshoven, Jay 
Friedlander and Vivek Dwivedi of the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.  PROGRAM DESCRIPTION	1
1.1 Introduction	1
1.2 Program Authority	1
1.3 Program Management	2
1.4 Three-Phase Program	2
1.5 Eligibility Requirements	3
1.6 General Information	4
2.  DEFINITIONS	4
2.1 Small Business Concern	4
2.2 Research Institution	5
2.3 Research or Research and Development (R/R&D)	5
2.4 Cooperative Research or Research and Development	5
2.5 Subcontract	5
2.6 Socially and Economically Disadvantaged Small Business Concern	5
2.7 Socially and Economically Disadvantaged Individual	5
2.8 Women-Owned Small Business	6
2.9 United States	6
2.10 Commercialization	6
3.  PROPOSAL PREPARATION INSTRUCTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS	6
3.1 Fundamental Considerations	6
3.2 Phase I Proposal Requirements	6
3.3 Phase II Proposal Requirements	10
4.  METHOD OF SELECTION AND EVALUATION CRITERIA	13
4.1 Phase I Proposals	13
4.2 Phase II Proposals	14
4.3 Debriefing of Unsuccessful Offerors	15
5.  CONSIDERATIONS	16
5.1 Awards	16
5.2 Phase I Reporting	17
5.3 Payment Schedule for Phase I	17
5.4 Proprietary Information	17
5.5 Non-NASA Reviewers	17
5.6 Release of Proposal Information	17
5.7 Final Disposition of Proposals	18
5.8 Rights in Data Developed Under SBIR/STTR Contracts	18
5.9 Copyrights	18
5.10 Patents	18
5.11 Cost Sharing	18
5.12 Profit or Fee	19
5.13 Joint Ventures and Limited Partnerships	19
5.14 Similar Awards and Prior Work	19
5.15 Contractor Commitments	19
5.16 Additional Information	20
5.17 Property	20
6.  SUBMISSION OF PROPOSALS	21
6.1 The Submission Process	21
6.2 Internet Submission	21
6.3 Postal Submission	22
6.4 Acknowledgment of Proposal Receipt	22
6.5 Withdrawal of Proposals	23
7.  SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL INFORMATION SOURCES	23
7.1 NASA SBIR/STTR Homepage	23
7.2 NASA Commercial Technology Network	23
7.3 NASA Technology Utilization Services	23
7.4 United States Small Business Administration	23
7.5 National Technical Information Service	24
8.  RESEARCH TOPICS FOR SBIR AND STTR	25
8.1 SBIR Research Topics	25
8.1.1  Aerospace Technology	27
8.1.2 Biological and Physical Research	49
8.1.3 Earth Science	71
8.1.4 Human Exploration and Development of Space	97
8.1.5 Space Science	117
8.2 STTR Research Topics	141
8.2.1  Human Operations in Space: Intelligent Medical Systems	142
8.2.2  Turbomachinery: Ultra-Efficient Engine Technology	142
8.2.3  Materials and Structures: Materials Development	144
8.2.4  Launch and Payload Processing Systems	145
9.  SUBMISSION FORMS AND CERTIFICATIONS	149
9.1 SBIR Forms and Certifications	150
9.1.1  FORM 9A – SBIR Proposal Cover 	150
9.1.2  FORM 9B – SBIR Proposal Summary	153
9.1.3  FORM 9C – SBIR Summary Budget	155
9.1.4  SBIR Check List	158
9.2 STTR Forms and Certifications	159
9.2.1  FORM 9A – STTR Proposal Cover	159
9.2.2  FORM 9B – STTR Proposal Summary	162
9.2.3  FORM 9C – STTR Summary Budget	164
9.2.4  Model Cooperative Agreement	167
9.2.5  Model Allocation of Rights Agreement	168
9.2.6  STTR Check List	172
APPENDIX A:  PHASE I SAMPLE TABLE OF CONTENTS	173
APPENDIX B:  SAMPLE FORMAT FOR BRIEFING CHART	173



2001 NASA SBIR/STTR Program Solicitations


1.  Program Description

1.1 Introduction

This document includes two NASA program solicitations with separate research areas under which small business 
concerns (SBCs) are invited to submit proposals:  the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program and the 
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program. In the past, NASA has issued separate SBIR and STTR 
solicitations.  Because of the similarities in the execution of these programs, this single document is being issued for 
FY 2001. 

The STTR Program is modeled on the SBIR program with the additional purpose to encourage the transfer of the 
intellectual concepts and ideas resident in our nation’s non-profit Research Institutes (RIs). The STTR program 
allows the principal investigator (PI) to be employed at the RI, while the SBIR program requires that the PI have 
primary employment at the SBC. In addition, STTR proposals must include a formal cooperative research agreement 
between the SBC and the RI.  SBIR proposals may involve collaboration between the SBC and other organizations, 
including a RI.  For the STTR program, not less than 40 percent of the work (amount requested including cost 
sharing, less fee, if any) is to be performed by the SBC as the prime contractor, and not less than 30 percent of the 
work is to be performed by the RI.  For the SBIR Program, not less than 2/3 of the work is to be performed by the 
SBC as the prime contractor during Phase I, and not less than 50 percent of the work is to be performed by the SBC 
as the prime contractor during Phase II.

This document contains program background information, outlines eligibility requirements for participants, 
describes the three program phases, and provides information for submitting responsive proposals.  The 2001 
Solicitation period for Phase I proposals begins March 28, 2001 and ends June 6, 2001.  

The purposes of the SBIR/STTR programs, as established by law, are to stimulate technological innovation in the 
private sector; to strengthen the role of SBCs in meeting federal research and development needs; to increase the 
commercial application of these research results; and to encourage participation of socially and economically 
disadvantaged persons and women-owned small businesses.  

To be eligible for selection, a proposal must be based on an innovation having high technical or scientific merit that 
is responsive to a NASA need described herein, and which offers potential commercial application. Proposals must 
be submitted via the internet (http://sbir.nasa.gov) and include all relevant documentation. Unsolicited proposals will 
not be accepted.  

A proposal directed towards system studies, market research, routine engineering development of existing products 
or proven concepts and modifications of existing products without innovative changes is considered non-responsive.  
Selection preference will be given to eligible proposals where the innovations are judged to have significant 
potential for commercial application. 

Subject to the availability of funds, NASA plans to select around 300 SBIR and 20 STTR Phase I proposals for 
negotiation of fixed-price contracts in September 2001.  Historically, the ratio of the number of Phase I proposals to 
awards for SBIR is 7:1 and for STTR is 5:1. 

1.2 Program Authority

SBIR:  This Solicitation is issued pursuant to the authority contained in P.L. 106-554.  Government-wide SBIR 
policy is provided by the Small Business Administration (SBA) through its Policy Directive.  The current law 
authorizes the program through September 30, 2008.

STTR: This Solicitation is issued pursuant to the authority contained in P.L. 102-564.  Government-wide STTR 
policy is provided by the SBA through its Policy Directive.  The current law authorizes the program through 
September 30, 2001.
1.3 Program Management

The Office of Aerospace Technology provides overall policy direction for the NASA SBIR/STTR programs.  The 
Program Management Office is hosted at the Goddard Space Flight Center.  The Procurement Management Office is 
hosted at Glenn Research Center.

The SBIR Program Solicitation is aligned with NASA’s five Strategic Enterprises (http://www.nasa.gov).  The 
needs of all Strategic Enterprises are reflected in the research areas identified in Section 8.

The STTR Program Solicitation is aligned with the NASA Centers of Excellence.  Each Center of Excellence par-
ticipates every other year.  JPL does not participate in the management of the STTR program.

Information regarding the Strategic Enterprises and the NASA Centers can be obtained at the following websites:


NASA Strategic Enterprises
Aerospace Technology
http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/aero
Biological and Physical Research
http://SpaceResearch.nasa.gov 
Earth Science
http://earth.nasa.gov
Human Exploration and Development of Space
http://www.hq.nasa.gov/osf/heds/
Space Science
http://spacescience.nasa.gov/

NASA Installations
Ames Research Center (ARC)
http://www.arc.nasa.gov
Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC)
http://www.dfrc.nasa.gov
Glenn Research Center (GRC)
http://www.grc.nasa.gov
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC)
http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)
http://www.jpl.nasa.gov
Johnson Space Center (JSC)
http://www.jsc.nasa.gov
Kennedy Space Center (KSC)
http://www.ksc.nasa.gov
Langley Research Center (LaRC)
http://www.larc.nasa.gov
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC)
http://www.msfc.nasa.gov
Stennis Space Center (SSC)
http://www.ssc.nasa.gov

1.4 Three-Phase Program
 
1.4.1 Phase I.  The purpose of Phase I is to determine the scientific, technical, and commercial merit and feasibility 
of the proposed innovation, and the quality of the SBC’s performance with a relatively small NASA investment 
before consideration of further Federal support in Phase II.  Successful completion of Phase I objectives is a prereq-
uisite to Phase II consideration.

Phase I must concentrate on establishing the scientific or technical merit and feasibility of the proposed innovation 
and on providing a basis for continued development in Phase II.  Proposals must conform to the format described in 
Section 3.2.  Evaluation and selection criteria are described in Section 4.1.  NASA is solely responsible for deter-
mining the relative merit of proposals, their selection for award, and judging the value of Phase I results.

Maximum funding and period of performance for Phase I:


SBIR
STTR
Maximum Contract Value
$ 70,000
$ 100,000
Duration
6 months
12 months
1.4.2 Phase II.  The objective of Phase II is to continue the Research or Research and Development (R/R&D) effort 
from Phase I. Only SBCs awarded Phase I contracts are eligible for Phase II funding agreements, and only at the 
Federal Agency, which awarded the Phase I project.  The Government is not obligated to fund any specific Phase II 
proposal.  Contractors have up to 24 months to complete the effort and submit their final report.  

Phase II projects are chosen as a result of competitive evaluations based on selection criteria provided in Section 4.2. 
Phase II proposals are more comprehensive than those required for Phase I and are to be prepared in accordance 
with instructions provided in the Phase I contract.  

Maximum funding and period of performance for Phase II:	
		
	
SBIR
STTR
Maximum Contract Value
$ 600,000
$ 500,000
Duration
24 months
24 months

1.4.3 Phase III.  NASA may award Phase III contracts for products or services with non-SBIR/STTR funds.  Phase 
I and Phase II awards satisfy the requirements of the Competition in Contracting Act for subsequent NASA Phase 
III contracting. The small business is also expected to use non-Federal capital to pursue private sector applications 
of the R/R&D effort.  

1.5 Eligibility Requirements

1.5.1 Small Business Concern.  Only firms qualifying as SBCs, as defined in Section 2.1, are eligible to participate 
in these programs. Socially and economically disadvantaged and women-owned SBCs are particularly encouraged 
to propose.




1.5.2 Place of Performance.  For both Phase I and Phase II, the R/R&D must be performed in the United States 
(Section 2.9).

1.5.3 Principal Investigator  The primary employment of the PI must be with the SBC under the SBIR Program, 
while under the STTR Program the PI may be employed with the RI.

REQUIREMENTS
SBIR
STTR
Primary Employment
PI must be with the SBC
PI may be employed with the RI or 
SBC
Employment 
Certification
The offeror must certify in the proposal that the 
primary employment of the PI will be with the 
SBC at the time of award and during the con-
duct of the project.  Primary employment 
means that the PI will average a minimum of 20 
hours per week with the SBC, and that more 
than half of the PI’s total employed time (in-
cluding all concurrent employers, consulting, 
and self-employed time) is spent with the SBC.  
Primary employment with a small business 
concern precludes full-time employment at 
another organization.  If the PI does not meet 
these primary employment requirements, the 
offeror must explain how these requirements 
will be met if the proposal is selected for con-
tract negotiations that may lead to an award.
If the PI is not an employee of the 
SBC, the offeror must describe the 
management process to ensure SBC 
control of the project.


REQUIREMENTS
SBIR
STTR
Co-Principal 
Investigators
Not Acceptable
Not Acceptable
Misrepresentation of 
Qualifications
Will result in rejection of the proposal or termi-
nation of the contract
Will result in rejection of the 
proposal or termination of the 
contract
Substitution of PIs
Must receive advanced written approval from 
NASA
Must receive advanced written 
approval from NASA

1.6 General Information

1.6.1 Solicitation Distribution.  This 2001 SBIR/STTR Program Solicitation is available via the NASA 
SBIR/STTR homepage (http://sbir.nasa.gov). SBCs are encouraged to check the SBIR/STTR homepage for 
program updates.  Any updates or corrections to the Solicitation will be posted there. If the SBC has difficulty 
accessing the Solicitation, contact the Help Desk (Section 1.6.2).  

1.6.2 Means of Contacting NASA SBIR/STTR Program 

(1) NASA SBIR/STTR Homepage:  http://sbir.nasa.gov 

(2) Each of the NASA field installations has its own homepage including strategic planning and program informa-
tion.  Please consult these homepages as noted in Section 1.3 for more details on the technology requirements 
within the subtopic areas.

(3) Help Desk.  For inquiries, requests, and help-related questions, contact via:

e-mail:	sbir@reisys.com 
telephone:	301-937-0888 between 8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. (Mon.-Fri., Eastern Time) 
facsimile:	301-937-0204

The requestor must provide the name and telephone number of the person to contact, the organization name and 
address, and the specific questions or requests.

(4) NASA SBIR/STTR Program Manager.  Specific information requests that could not be answered by the Help 
Desk should be mailed to:

Paul Mexcur, Program Manager
NASA SBIR/STTR Program Management Office 
Code 712, Building 3, Room 108
Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, MD 20771-0001

1.6.3 Questions About This Solicitation.  To ensure fairness, questions relating to the intent and/or content of 
research topics in this Solicitation cannot be answered during the Phase I solicitation period.  Only questions 
requesting clarification of proposal instructions and administrative matters will be answered.


2.  Definitions 

2.1 Small Business Concern 

An SBC is one that, at the time of award of Phase I and Phase II funding agreements, meets the following criteria:
		  
(1) Is independently owned and operated, is not dominant in the field of operation in which it is proposing, has its 
principal place of business located in the United States, and is organized for profit;
 
(2) Is at least 51 percent owned, or in the case of a publicly-owned business, at least 51 percent of its voting stock is 
owned by United States citizens or lawfully admitted permanent resident aliens; and
 
(3) Has, including its affiliates, a number of employees not exceeding 500 and meets the other regulatory 
requirements found in 13 CFR Part 121.  Business concerns, other than investment companies licensed, or state 
development companies qualifying under the Small Business Investment Act of 1958, 15 U.S.C. 661, et seq., 
are affiliates of one another when, either directly or indirectly, (1) one concern controls or has the power to 
control the other or (2) a third party controls or has the power to control both.  Control can be exercised through 
common ownership, common management, and contractual relationships.  The terms "affiliates" and "number 
of employees" are defined in greater detail in 13 CFR 121. 

Small business concerns include sole proprietorships, partnerships, corporations, joint ventures, associations, or 
cooperatives.  Eligible joint ventures are limited to no more than 49 percent participation by foreign business 
entities.

2.2 Research Institution 

A U.S. research institution is one that is: (1) a contractor-operated federally funded research and development cen-
ter, as identified by the National Science Foundation in accordance with the government-wide Federal Acquisition 
Regulation issued in section 35(c)(1) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (or any successor legislation 
thereto), or (2) a non-profit research institution as defined in section 4(5) of the Stevenson-Wydler Technology 
Innovation Act of 1980, or (3) a non-profit college or university.

2.3 Research or Research and Development (R/R&D)

Any activity that is (1) a systematic, intensive study directed toward greater knowledge or understanding of the 
subject studied, (2) a systematic study directed specifically toward applying new knowledge to meet a recognized 
need, or (3) a systematic application of knowledge toward the production of useful materials, devices, systems, or 
methods, including the design, development, and improvement of prototypes and new processes to meet specific 
requirements.

2.4 Cooperative Research or Research and Development 

For purposes of the NASA STTR Program, cooperative R/R&D is that which is to be conducted jointly by the SBC 
and the RI in which at least 40 percent of the work (amount requested, including cost sharing if any, less fee if any) 
is performed by the SBC and at least 30 percent of the work is performed by the RI.

2.5 Subcontract

Any agreement, other than one involving an employer-employee relationship, entered into by a Federal Government 
contractor calling for supplies or services required solely for the performance of the original funding agreement.

2.6 Socially and Economically Disadvantaged Small Business Concern

A socially and economically disadvantaged SBC is one that is: (1) at least 51 percent owned by (i) an Indian tribe or 
a native Hawaiian organization or (ii) one or more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals; and          
(2) whose management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more socially and economically 
disadvantaged individuals.

2.7 Socially and Economically Disadvantaged Individual

A member of any of the following groups: Black Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans, Asian-Pacific 
Americans, Subcontinent-Asian Americans, other groups designated from time to time by SBA to be socially 
disadvantaged, or any other individual found to be socially and economically disadvantaged by SBA pursuant to 
Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. 637(a). 


2.8 Women-Owned Small Business

A women-owned SBC is one that is at least 51 percent owned by a woman or women who also control and operate 
it.  "Control" in this context means exercising the power to make policy decisions.  "Operate" in this context means 
being actively involved in the day-to-day management.

2.9 United States 

Means the 50 states, the territories and possessions of the United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the 
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and the District of Columbia.

2.10 Commercialization

Commercialization is a process of developing markets and producing and delivering products or services for sale 
(whether by the originating party or by others).  As used here, commercialization includes both Government and 
non-government markets.


3.  Proposal Preparation Instructions and Requirements

3.1 Fundamental Considerations

Multiple Proposal Submissions.  An offeror may submit different proposals in response to any number of 
subtopics, but every proposal must be based on an unique innovation, must be limited in scope to just one subtopic, 
and may be submitted only under that subtopic.  Submitting substantially equivalent proposals to several subtopics 
is not permitted and may result in all such proposals being rejected without evaluation. 








End Deliverables.  The deliverable item at the end of a Phase I contract shall be a comprehensive report that 
justifies, validates, and defends the experimental and theoretical work accomplished. Delivery of a product or 
service with the Phase I report may be desirable, but it is not a requirement.

Deliverable items for Phase II contracts shall include products or services in addition to professional quality reports 
of further developments or applications of the Phase I results.  These deliverables may include prototypes, models, 
software, or complete products or services.  The reported results of Phase II must address and provide the basis for 
validating the innovation and the potential for implementation of commercial applications.





3.2 Phase I Proposal Requirements

3.2.1 General Requirements

Page Limitation.  A Phase I proposal shall not exceed a total of 25 standard 8 1/2 x 11 inch (21.6 x 27.9 cm) pages.  
A page is defined as a single side of a piece of paper. All four proposal items required in Section 3.2.2 will be 
included within this total.  Each page shall be numbered consecutively at the bottom. Margins should be 1.0 inch 
(2.5 cm). Proposals exceeding the 25 page limitation will be rejected during administrative screening. 

Web site references, product samples, videotapes, slides, or other ancillary items will not be accepted.  Offerors are 
requested not to use the entire 25-page allowance unless necessary.  

Type Size.  No type size smaller than 10 point is to be used for text or tables, except as legends on reduced 
drawings.  Proposals prepared with smaller font sizes will be rejected without consideration.

Classified Information.  NASA does not accept proposals that contain classified information.

3.2.2 Format Requirements.  All required items of information must be covered in the proposal.  The space 
allocated to each part of the technical proposal will depend on the project chosen and the offeror's approach. 

Each proposal submitted must contain the following four items in the order presented:

(1) Proposal Cover (Form 9A), signed, as page 1
(2) Proposal Summary (Form 9B), as page 2
(3) Technical Proposal (11 Parts in order as specified in Section 3.2.4), including all graphics, and starting at page 3 
with a table of contents 
(4) Summary Budget (Form 9C) 





3.2.3 Proposal Cover and Proposal Summary

Page 1: Proposal Cover (Form 9A).  A sample copy of the Proposal Cover is provided in Section 9.  The offeror 
shall provide complete information for each item and submit the form as required in Section 6.  The proposal project 
title shall be concise and descriptive of the proposed effort.  The title should not use acronyms or words like 
"Development of" or "Study of."  The NASA research topic title must not be used as the proposal title.

Page 2: Proposal Summary (Form 9B).  A sample copy of the Proposal Summary is provided in Section 9.  The 
offeror shall provide complete information for each item and submit Form 9B as required in Section 6.  The 
technical abstract portion is limited to 200 words and shall summarize the implications of the approach and the 
anticipated results of both Phase I and Phase II.  Potential commercial applications of the technology should also be 
presented. If the technical abstract is judged to be non-responsive to the subtopic, the proposal will be rejected 
without further evaluation. 





3.2.4 Technical Proposal.  This part of the submission shall not contain any budget data and must consist of all 
eleven parts listed below in the given order. All parts must be numbered and titled; parts that are not applicable must 
be noted as “Not Applicable.” 





Part 1: Table of Contents.  Page 3 of the proposal shall begin with a brief table of contents indicating the page 
numbers of each of the parts of the proposal.  A sample table of contents is included in Appendix A.

Part 2: Identification and Significance of the Innovation.  The first paragraph of Part 2 shall contain: 

(1) A clear and succinct statement of the specific innovation proposed, and why it is an innovation, and
(2) A brief explanation of how the innovation is relevant and important to meeting the technology need 
described in the subtopic.  The initial paragraph shall contain no more than 200 words.  NASA will reject 
proposals that lack explanation of the innovation.  In subsequent paragraphs, Part 2 may also include 
appropriate background and elaboration to explain the proposed innovation. 

Part 3: Technical Objectives.  State the specific objectives of the Phase I R/R&D effort including the technical 
questions that must be answered to determine the feasibility of the proposed innovation.

Part 4: Work Plan.  Phase I R/R&D should address the objectives and questions cited in Part 3.  The work 
plan should indicate what, where, and how it will be done.  The methods planned to achieve each objective or 
task should be discussed in detail.  Schedules, task descriptions and assignments, resource allocations, estimated 
task hours for each key personnel, and planned accomplishments including project milestones shall be included. 









Part 5: Related R/R&D.  Describe significant current and/or previous R/R&D that is directly related to the 
proposal including any conducted by the PI or by the offeror.  Describe how it relates to the proposed effort and 
any planned coordination with outside sources.  The offeror must persuade reviewers of his or her awareness of 
key recent R/R&D conducted by others in the specific subject area.  At the offeror's option, this section may 
include concise bibliographic references in support of the proposal if they are confined to activities directly 
related to the proposed work.

Part 6: Key Personnel and Bibliography of Directly Related Work.  Identify key personnel involved in 
Phase I activities whose expertise and functions are essential to the success of the project. Provide bibliographic 
information including directly related education and experience.   
The PI is considered key to the success of the effort and must make a substantial commitment to the project. 
The following requirements are applicable:

Functions.  The functions of the PI are: planning and directing the project; leading it technically and 
making substantial personal contributions during its implementation; serving as the primary contact with 
NASA on the project; and ensuring that the work proceeds according to contract agreements.  Competent 
management of PI functions is essential to project success.  The Phase I proposal shall describe the nature 
of the PI's activities and the amount of time that the PI will personally apply on the project.  The amount of 
time the PI proposes to spend on the project must be acceptable to the NASA contracting officer.

Qualifications.  The qualifications and capabilities of the proposed PI and the basis for PI selection are to 
be clearly presented in the proposal.  NASA has the sole right to accept or reject a substitute PI based on 
factors such as education, experience, demonstrated ability and competence, and any other evidence related 
to the specific assignment.

Eligibility.  This part shall also establish and confirm the eligibility of the PI (Section 1.5.3), and indicate 
the extent to which other proposals recently submitted or planned for submission in 2001 and existing 
projects commit the time of PI concurrently with this proposed activity.  Any attempt to circumvent the 
restriction on PIs working more than half-time for an academic or a non-profit organization by substituting 
an ineligible PI will result in rejection of the proposal.

Part 7: Relationship with Phase II or Future R/R&D.  State the anticipated results of the proposed R/R&D 
effort if the project is successful (through Phase I and Phase II).  Discuss the significance of the Phase I effort in 
providing a foundation for the Phase II R/R&D continuation.

Part 8: Company Information and Facilities.  Provide adequate information to allow the evaluators to assess 
the ability of the offeror to carry out the proposed Phase I and projected Phase II and Phase III activities.  The 
offeror should describe the relevant facilities and equipment, their availability, and those to be acquired, to 
support the proposed activities.  NASA will not fund the purchase of equipment, instrumentation, or facilities 
under Phase I contracts as a direct cost.  Special tooling may be allowed. (Section 5.17) 

The capability of the offeror to perform the proposed activities and bring a resulting product or service to 
market must be indicated.  Qualifications of the offeror in marketing related products or services or in raising 
capital should be presented.  






Part 9: Subcontracts and Consultants.  The SBC may establish business arrangements with other entities or 
individuals to participate in performance of the proposed R/R&D effort. The offeror must describe all subcon-
tracting or other business arrangements, and identify the relevant organizations and/or individuals with whom 
arrangements are planned. The expertise to be provided by the entities must be described in detail, as well as the 
functions, services, number of hours and labor rates, and their extent of the effort.  The proposal must include a 
signed statement by each participating organization or individual that they will be available at the times required 
for the purposes and extent of effort described in the proposal.  Failure to provide certification(s) may result in 
rejection of the proposal. Subcontractors’ and consultants’ work must be performed in the United States.

SBIR

STTR
The proposed business arrangements must 
not exceed one-third of the research and/or 
analytical work (amount requested including 
cost sharing if any, less fee, if any).  

The proposed business arrangements with 
individuals or organizations other than the RI 
must not exceed 30 percent of the work 
(amount requested including cost sharing if 
any, less fee, if any).  

Part 10: Commercial Applications Potential.  The Phase I proposal shall forecast the commercial potential of 
the project assuming success through Phase II. The proposer will be required to address the commercial, non-
NASA applications in detail in the Phase II proposal (Sections 3.3 and 4.2.2).

Part 11: Similar Proposals and Awards.  A firm may elect to submit proposals for essentially equivalent work 
under other federal program solicitations.  However, NASA will not fund duplicate proposals for essentially 
equivalent work under any Government program.  The offeror will inform NASA of related proposals and 
awards and clearly state whether the SBC has submitted currently active proposals for similar work under other 
Federal Government program solicitations or intends to submit proposals for such work to other agencies.  For 
all such cases, the following information is required:

(1) The name and address of the agencies to which proposals have been or will be submitted, or from which 
awards have been received;
(2) Dates of such proposal submissions or awards;
(3) Title, number, and date of solicitations under which proposals have been or will be submitted or awards 
received;
(4) The specific applicable research topic for each such proposal submitted or award received;
(5) Titles of research projects;
(6) Name and title of the PI/project manager for each proposal that has been or will be submitted, or from 
which awards have been received.









3.2.5 Proposed Budget

Summary Budget (Form 9C).  The offeror shall complete the Summary Budget, following the instructions pro-
vided with the form (Section 9) and include it and any explanation sheets, if needed, as the last page(s) of the 
proposal.  Information shall be submitted to explain the offeror’s plans for use of the requested funds to enable 
NASA to determine whether the proposed budget is fair and reasonable. 

Property. Proposed costs for materials may be included.  "Materials" means property that may be incorporated or 
attached to a deliverable end item or that may be consumed or expended in performing the contract.  It includes 
assemblies, components, parts, raw materials, and small tools that may be consumed in normal use.  Any purchase 
of equipment or products under a SBIR/STTR contract using NASA funds should be American-made to the extent 
possible. NASA will not fund facility acquisition under Phase I as a direct cost (Section 5.17).

Travel.  Travel during Phase I is not normally allowed to prove technical merit and feasibility of the proposed 
innovation.  However, where the offeror deems travel to be essential for these purposes, it is necessary to limit it to 
one person, one trip to the sponsoring NASA installation.  Proposed travel must be described as to purpose and 
benefits in proving feasibility, and is subject to negotiation and approval by the contracting officer.  Trips to 
conferences are not allowed under the Phase I contract.

Profit.  A profit or fee may be included in the proposed budget as noted in Section 5.12.

Cost Sharing.  See Section 5.11.








3.2.7 Addendum (Applicable for SBIR awards only)

The Small Business Administration requires offerors, who have received more than 15 Phase II awards from all 
agencies in the prior 5 fiscal years, to report those awards and their progress toward commercialization.  The listing 
of awards shall be included in a separate "Addendum: Phase II History" that will not be counted against the Phase I 
25-page proposal limit.  The Addendum should be concise.  Information for each Phase II contract shall include:

(1) Name of awarding agency
(2) Date of award and date of completion
(3) Funding agreement number and amount
(4) Topic or subtopic name
(5) Project title
(6) Sources, dates and amounts of federal and/or private sector Phase III follow-on funding agreements
(7) Post-Phase II commercialization activities, including development, marketing, sales, and projections

3.3 Phase II Proposal Requirements

3.3.1 General Requirements

The Phase I contract will serve as a request for proposal (RFP) for the Phase II follow-on project.  Phase II proposals 
are more comprehensive than those required for Phase I.  Phase II proposals are required to be submitted 
electronically by utilizing the electronic handbook system hosted on the NASA SBIR homepage 
(http://sbir.nasa.gov).  Submission of a Phase II proposal is strictly voluntary and NASA assumes no responsibility 
for any proposal preparation expenses. 




Page Limitation.  A Phase II proposal shall not exceed a total of 50 standard 8 1/2 x 11 inch (21.6 x 27.9 cm) 
pages.  A page is defined as a single side of a piece of paper. All parts required in Section 3.3.2 will be included 
within this total.  Each page shall be numbered consecutively at the bottom. Margins should be 1.0 inch (2.5 cm). 
Proposals exceeding the 50-page limitation will be rejected during administrative screening. 

Type Size.  No type size smaller than 10 point is to be used for text or tables, except as legends on reduced 
drawings.  Proposals prepared with smaller font sizes will be rejected without consideration.

Classified Information.  NASA does not accept proposals that contain classified information.

3.3.2 Proposal Contents.  

Proposals shall be prepared in the following order.  Failure to include any requested information in the proposal may 
make it non-responsive to the RFP. Budget data should be strictly limited to Part 13.  A proposal omitting any part 
will be considered non-responsive to this Solicitation and may be rejected during administrative screening. The 
proposal must consist of all 13 parts numbered and in the following order: 
	
	Part 1: Proposal Cover. 

	Part 2: Proposal Summary. 

	Part 3: Table of Contents. 

	Part 4: Results of the Phase I Project.  Briefly describe how Phase I has proven the feasibility of the 
innovation, provided a rationale for both NASA and commercial applications, and demonstrated the ability of 
the offeror to conduct R/R&D.

	Part 5: Technical Objectives, Approach and Work Plan.  Define the specific objectives of the Phase II 
research and technical approach; and provide a work plan defining specific tasks, performance schedules, 
milestones, and deliverables. 

	Part 6: Company Information.  Describe the capability of the firm to carry out Phase II and Phase III 
activities including its organization, operations, number of employees, R/R&D capabilities, and experience 
relevant to the work proposed.

Part 7: Facilities and Equipment.  This section shall provide adequate information to allow the evaluators to 
assess the ability of the SBC to carry out the proposed Phase II activities.  The offeror should describe the 
relevant facilities and equipment currently available, and those to be purchased, to support the proposed ac-
tivities.  NASA will not fund the acquisition of equipment, instrumentation, or facilities under Phase II 
contracts as a direct cost. Special tooling may be allowed. (Section 5.17)

If an offeror proposes the use of unique or one-of-a-kind Government facilities, a statement describing the 
uniqueness of the facility and its availability to the offeror at specified times, signed by the appropriate Gov-
ernment official must be included with the proposal.  Proposals lacking this signed statement may be rejected 
without evaluation. 

Note:  If the proposal does not require the use of Government facilities or equipment, the offeror shall so state 
in this part of the proposal.

	Part 8: Key Personnel.  Identify the key personnel for the project, confirm their availability for Phase II, and 
discuss their qualifications in terms of education, work experience, and accomplishments relevant to the 
project. 

	Part 9: Subcontracts and Consultants.  Describe in detail any subcontract, consultant, or other business 
arrangements involving participation in performance of the proposed R/R&D effort and provide written evidence 
of their availability for the project. The proposal must include a commitment from each subcontractor and/or 
consultant that they will be available at the times required for the purposes and extent of effort described in the 
proposal.  Subcontractors’ and consultants’ work must be performed in the United States.  Failure to provide 
subcontractor/consultant commitments may result in rejection of proposal. 

SBIR Phase II Proposal

STTR Phase II Proposal
A minimum of one-half of the work    
(contract cost less profit) must be performed 
by the proposing SBC. 

A minimum of 40 percent of the work must be 
performed by the proposing SBC and 30 
percent by the RI. 

	Part 10: Commercialization and Phase III Plans.  Describe plans for commercialization (Phase III) in terms 
of each of the following areas:

		(1) Product or Service Commercial Feasibility: Provide a description of the (a) contemplated 
commercial      product and/or service, the corresponding commercial venture, and the unique competitive 
advantage of both; and (b) technical obstacles to commercial applications, as well as plans to address them.

		(2) Market Feasibility and Competition: Describe: (a) the target market niche including the distinction 
between U.S. Government and other markets; (b) estimated potential market size in terms of revenues to be 
realized by the offer from U.S. Government markets and, separately, from other markets; (c) competitive 
environment in terms of present and likely competing similar and alternative technologies, and 
corresponding competing domestic and foreign entities; (d) significant developments within the targeted 
business sector; and (e) offeror’s ability, if any, to protect relevant technology with patents or rights to 
exclusive access.

		(3) Strategic Relevance to the Offeror: Describe the relevance of the targeted commercial venture to the 
offeror's: (a) current business segments; (b) relative position with respect to its competitors; and (c) 
strategic planning for the next 5 years.

		(4) Key Management, Technical Personnel and Organizational Structure: Describe: (a) the skills and 
experience of key management and technical personnel relevant to bringing innovative technology to 
commercial application, (b) current organizational structure, and (c) plans and timeline for obtaining the 
balance of all necessary key business development expertise and other staffing requirements.

		(5) Production and Operations: Describe: (a) business development progress to date regarding the 
contemplated commercial venture; (b) obstacles, plans, and associated milestones regarding all key 
business development elements; and (c) sources and components of private physical resources committed 
to date and plans for obtaining the balance of the necessary physical resources.  

		(6) Financial Planning:  Describe: (a) the amounts and sources of private financial resources expended 
and committed to date with respect to the technology development project, and with respect to business 
development of the targeted commercial venture; (b) significant requirements of potential investors, 
creditors, and insurers of the venture; (c) proforma statement of cash flow with respect to the targeted 
commercial venture that includes best estimates of at least the following major components and timing 
thereof: capital investment, revenues, principal and interest payments, depreciation of relevant assets, other 
operating expenses; and (d) evidence of the offeror’s current financial strength (audited or unaudited 
financial statements may be appended to address this).
 
Part 11: Capital Commitments Supporting Phase II and Phase III.  Describe and document capital 
commitments from non-SBIR/STTR sources or from internal SBC funds for pursuit of Phase II and Phase III.  
Offerors for Phase II contracts are strongly urged to obtain non-SBIR/STTR funding support commitments for 
follow-on Phase III activities and additional support of Phase II from parties other than the proposing firm. 
Funding support commitments must provide that a specific, substantial amount will be made available to the 
firm to pursue the stated Phase II and/or Phase III objectives.  They must indicate the source, date, and 
conditions or contingencies under which the funds will be made available.  Alternatively, self-commitments of 
the same type and magnitude that are required from outside sources can be considered.  If Phase III will be 
funded internally, offerors should describe their financial position.


Evidence of funding support commitments from outside parties must be provided in writing and should 
accompany the Phase II proposal.  Letters of commitment should specify available funding commitments, 
other resources to be provided, and any contingent conditions.  Expressions of technical interest by such parties 
in the Phase II research or of potential future financial support are insufficient and will not be accepted as 
support commitments by NASA. 

	Part 12: Related R/R&D.  Describe R/R&D related to the proposed work and affirm that the stated objectives 
have not already been achieved and that the same development is not presently being pursued elsewhere under 
contract to the Federal Government.

	Part 13: Proposal Pricing.  Special instructions for pricing the Phase II proposal will be presented in the 
Phase-I contract and may be provided by the contracting officer.


4.  Method of Selection and Evaluation Criteria

4.1 Phase I Proposals

Proposals judged to be responsive to the administrative requirements of this Solicitation and having a reasonable 
potential of meeting a NASA need, as evidenced by the technical abstract included in the Proposal Summary (Form 
9B), will be evaluated on a competitive basis.

4.1.1 Evaluation Process.  Proposals should provide all information needed for complete evaluation and evaluators 
are not expected to seek additional information.  Evaluations will be performed by NASA scientists and engineers 
and by qualified experts outside of NASA (including industry, academia, and other Government agencies) as re-
quired to determine or verify the merit of a proposal.  Offerors should not assume that evaluators are acquainted 
with the firm, key individuals, or with any experiments or other information.  Any pertinent references or publica-
tions should be noted in Part 5 of the technical proposal. 

4.1.2 Phase I Evaluation Criteria.  NASA will give primary consideration to the scientific and technical merit and 
feasibility of the proposal and its benefit to NASA.  Each proposal will be judged and scored on its own merits using 
the factors described below:

Factor 1. Scientific/Technical Merit and Feasibility 
The proposed R/R&D effort will be evaluated on whether it offers a clearly innovative and feasible technical 
approach to the NASA problem area described in the subtopic.  Specific objectives, approaches and plans for 
developing and verifying the innovation must demonstrate a clear understanding of the problem and the cur-
rent state-of-the-art.  The degree of understanding and significance of the risks involved in the proposed 
innovation must be presented. 

Factor 2. Experience, Qualifications and Facilities  
The technical capabilities and experience of the PI or project manager, key personnel, staff, consultants and 
subcontractors, if any, are evaluated for consistency with the research effort and their degree of commitment 
and availability.  The necessary instrumentation or facilities required must be shown to be adequate and any 
reliance on external sources, such as Government Furnished Equipment or Facilities, addressed (Section 5.17).

Factor 3. Effectiveness of the Proposed Work Plan
The work plan will be reviewed for its comprehensiveness, effective use of available resources, cost manage-
ment and proposed schedule for meeting the Phase I objectives.  The methods planned to achieve each 
objective or task should be discussed in detail.  






Factor 4. Commercial Merit and Feasibility
The proposal will be evaluated for any potential commercial applications in the private sector or for use by the 
Federal Government.

Scoring of Factors and Weighting: Factors 1, 2, and 3 will be scored numerically with Factor 1 worth 50 percent 
and Factors 2 and 3 each worth 25 percent. The sum of the scores for Factors 1, 2, and 3 will comprise the Technical 
Merit score. The score for Commercial Merit will be in the form of an adjectival rating (Excellent, Very Good, 
Average, Below Average, Poor).  For Phase 1 proposals, Technical Merit carries more weight than Commercial 
Merit. 

4.1.3 Selection.  After a proposal is reviewed based on the stated evaluation criteria, it will be ranked relative to all 
other proposals.  Selection decisions will consider the recommendations from all Centers, Strategic Enterprises, 
overall NASA priorities, and program balance.  The Source Selection Official has the final authority for choosing 
the specific proposals for contract negotiation.

The list of selections will be posted on the NASA SBIR/STTR web site (http://sbir.nasa.gov).  All firms will re-
ceive a formal notification letter. Selected firms will be notified of the designated contracting officer at the NASA 
Center responsible for negotiating the Phase I contract.









4.2 Phase II Proposals

4.2.1 Evaluation Process.  The Phase II evaluation process is similar to the Phase I process.  Each proposal will be 
reviewed by NASA scientists and engineers and by qualified experts outside of NASA as needed.  In addition, those 
proposals with high technical merit will be reviewed for commercial merit.  NASA uses a peer review panel to evaluate 
commercial merit.  Panel membership will include non-NASA personnel expert in business development and technol-
ogy commercialization.

4.2.2 Evaluation Factors.  The evaluation of Phase II proposals under this Solicitation will apply the following factors:

Factor 1. Scientific/Technical Merit and Feasibility 
The proposed R/R&D effort will be evaluated on its innovativeness, originality, and technical payoff potential if 
successful, including the degree to which Phase I objectives were met, the feasibility of the innovation, and 
whether the Phase I results indicate a Phase II project is appropriate.

Factor 2. Future Importance and Value to NASA
The eventual value of the product, process, or technology results to the NASA mission will be assessed.

Factor 3. Capability of the Small Business Concern  
NASA will assess the capability of the SBC to conduct Phase II based on (a) the validity of the project plans 
for achieving the stated goals; (b) the qualifications and ability of the project team (Principal Investigator/ 
Project Manager, company staff, consultants and subcontractors) relative to the proposed research; and (c) the 
availability of any required equipment and facilities.

	Factor 4. Commercial Potential.  Consideration will be given to the following:

		(1) Commercial potential of the technology: This includes an assessment of the offeror’s ability to 
demonstrate: (a) a specific, well-defined commercial product or service based on the technology to be 
developed; (b) a realistic target market niche of sufficient size; (c) that the targeted commercial product or 
service has strong potential for uniquely meeting a well-defined need within the target market niche; and 
(d) a commitment of significant private financial, physical, and technical personnel resources.

		(2) Demonstrated commercial intent of the offeror: This includes an assessment of:  (a) the importance 
of the targeted commercial venture to the offeror’s current business and strategic planning; (b) a targeted 
commercial venture that does not rely on continued U.S. Government markets; and (c) the adequacy of all 
resource commitments for Phase III development of the technology to a state of readiness for commercial 
application.

		(3) Capability of the offeror to bring successfully developed technology to commercial application: 
This includes assessment of the offeror's ability to demonstrate: (a) the offeror’s past success in bringing 
SBIR/STTR and other innovative technologies to commercial application; (b) well-thought-out business 
planning; (c) strong likelihood of the offeror’s bringing the remaining necessary private financial, physical, 
personnel and other resources to bear in a timely way to achieve commercial application of the technology 
in the not too distant term subsequent to Phase II; and (d) the strength of the current and continued financial 
viability of the offeror.

In applying these commercial criteria, NASA will assess proposal information in terms of credibility, objectivity, 
reasonableness of key assumptions, independent corroborating evidence, internal consistency, demonstrated 
awareness of key risk areas and critical business vulnerabilities, and other indicators of sound business analysis and 
judgment.

4.2.3 Evaluation and Selection.  Factors 1, 2, and 3 will be scored numerically with Factor 1 worth 50 percent and 
Factors 2 and 3 each worth 25 percent. The sum of the scores for Factors 1, 2, and 3 will comprise the Technical 
Merit score.  Proposals receiving high numerical scores will be evaluated and rated for their commercial potential 
using the criteria listed in Factor 4 and by applying the same adjectival ratings as set forth for Phase I proposals. 

Each NASA Installation managing Phase I projects will use these factors to evaluate the Phase II proposals it re-
ceives that are responsive to the Phase II RFP.  Final selections will be based on recommendations from all 
Installations and Strategic Enterprises; assessments of project value to NASA’s overall programs and plans; and any 
other evaluations or assessments (particularly of commercial potential) that may become available to the Source 
Selection Official.















4.3 Debriefing of Unsuccessful Offerors

After Phase I and Phase II selection decisions have been announced, debriefings for unsuccessful proposals will be 
available to the offeror's corporate official or designee via e-mail.  Telephone requests for debriefings will not be 
accepted.  Debriefings are not opportunities to reopen selection decisions.  They are intended to acquaint the offeror 
with perceived strengths and weaknesses of the proposal and perhaps identify constructive future action by the 
offeror.  

Debriefings will not disclose the identity of the proposal evaluators nor provide proposal scores, rankings in the 
competition, or the content of, or comparisons with other proposals.


4.3.1 Phase I Debriefings.  For Phase I proposals, any request for a debriefing must be made via e-mail to 
sbir@reisys.com, within 60 days after the selection announcement.  Late requests will not be honored.
 
4.3.2 Phase II Debriefings.  To request debriefings on Phase II proposals, offerors must request via e-mail to the 
Procurement Point of Contact at the appropriate NASA Center (not the SBIR/STTR Program Manager) within 60 
days after selection announcement.  Late requests will not be honored. 


5.  Considerations

5.1 Awards

5.1.1 Availability of Funds.  Both Phase I and Phase II awards are subject to availability of funds.  NASA has no 
obligation to make any specific number of Phase I or Phase II awards based on this Solicitation, and may elect to 
make several or no awards in any specific technical topic or subtopic.  


SBIR

STTR
? NASA plans to announce the selection of 
approximately 300 proposals resulting 
from this Solicitation, for negotiation of 
Phase I contracts with values not  ex-
ceeding $70,000.  Following contract 
negotiations and awards, Phase I       
contractors will have up to 6 months to 
carry out their programs, prepare their 
final reports, and submit Phase II pro-
posals.  

? NASA anticipates that approximately 40 
percent of the successfully completed 
Phase I projects from the SBIR 2001  
Solicitation will be selected for Phase II.  
Phase II agreements are fixed-price   
contracts with performance periods not 
exceeding 24 months and funding not 
exceeding $600,000.


? NASA plans to announce the selection of 
approximately 20 proposals resulting 
from this Solicitation, for negotiation of 
Phase I contracts with values not  ex-
ceeding $100,000.  Following contract 
negotiations and awards, Phase I       
contractors will have up to 12 months to 
carry out their programs, prepare their 
final reports, and submit Phase II       
proposals.  

? NASA anticipates that approximately 35 
percent of the successfully completed 
Phase I projects from the STTR 2001 
Solicitation will be selected for Phase II.  
Phase II agreements are fixed-price   
contracts with performance periods not 
exceeding 24 months and funding not 
exceeding $500,000.



5.1.2 Contracting.  Fixed-price contracts will be issued for both Phase I and Phase II awards.  Simplified contract 
documentation is employed; however, SBCs selected for award can reduce processing time by examining the pro-
curement documents, submitting signed representations and certifications, and responding to the Contracting Officer 
in a timely manner.  NASA will make Phase I model contract and other documents available to the public on the 
NASA SBIR/STTR homepage (http://sbir.nasa.gov) at the time of the selection announcement.  From the time of 
proposal selection until the award of a contract, only the Contracting Officer is authorized to commit the 
Government, and all communications must be through the Contracting Officer.






5.2 Phase I Reporting

An interim progress report is required when the invoice is submitted at project mid-point in accordance with the 
payment schedule (Section 5.3).  This report shall document progress made on the project and activities required for 
completion to provide NASA the basis for determining whether the payment is warranted.

A final report must be submitted to NASA upon completion of the Phase I R/R&D effort in accordance with con-
tract provisions.  It shall elaborate the project objectives, work carried out, results obtained, and assessments of 
technical merit and feasibility.  The final report shall include a single page summary as the first page, in a format 
provided in the Phase I contract, identifying the purpose of the R/R&D effort and describing the findings and results, 
including the degree to which the Phase I objectives were achieved, and whether the results justify Phase II con-
tinuation.  The potential applications of the project results in Phase III either for NASA or commercial purposes 
shall also be described.  The proposal summary is to be submitted without restriction for NASA publication.  

5.3 Payment Schedule for Phase I

Payments can be authorized as follows: one-third at the time of award, one-third at project mid-point after award, 
and the remainder upon acceptance of the final report by NASA.  The first two payments will be made 30 days after 
receipt of valid invoices.  The final payment will be made 30 days after acceptance of the final report, the New 
Technology Report, and other deliverables as required by the contract.  Electronic funds transfer will be employed 
and offerors will be required to submit account data if selected for contract negotiations.

5.4 Proprietary Information

It is NASA's policy to use information (data) included in proposals for evaluation purposes only.  Public release of 
information in any proposal submitted will be subject to existing statutory and regulatory requirements.  If informa-
tion consisting of a trade secret, proprietary commercial or financial information, or private personal information is 
provided in a proposal, NASA will treat in confidence the proprietary information provided the following legend 
appears on the title page of the proposal:

"For any purpose other than to evaluate the proposal, this data shall not be disclosed outside the 
Government and shall not be duplicated, used, or disclosed in whole or in part, provided that if a 
funding agreement is awarded to the offeror as a result of or in connection with the submission of this 
data, the Government shall have the right to duplicate, use or disclose the data to the extent provided 
in the funding agreement.  This restriction does not limit the Government's right to use information 
contained in the data if it is obtained from another source without restriction.  The data subject to this 
restriction are contained in pages _____ of this proposal."






5.5 Non-NASA Reviewers

In addition to Government personnel, NASA, at its discretion and in accordance with 18-15.207-71 of the NASA 
FAR Supplement, may utilize qualified individuals from outside the Government in the proposal review process.  
Any decision to obtain an outside evaluation shall take into consideration requirements for the avoidance of 
organizational or personal conflicts of interest and the competitive relationship, if any, between the prospective 
contractor or subcontractor(s) and the prospective outside evaluator.  Any such evaluation will be under agreement 
with the evaluator that the information (data) contained in the proposal will be used only for evaluation purposes and 
will not be further disclosed.

5.6 Release of Proposal Information

In submitting a proposal, the offeror agrees to permit the Government to disclose publicly the information contained 
on the Proposal Cover (Form 9A) and the Proposal Summary (Form 9B).  Other proposal information (data) is 
considered to be the property of the offeror, and NASA will protect it from public disclosure to the extent permitted 
by law. 

5.7 Final Disposition of Proposals

The Government retains ownership of proposals accepted for evaluation, and such proposals will not be returned to 
the offeror.  Copies of all evaluated Phase I proposals will be retained for one year after the Phase I selections have 
been made, after which time unsuccessful proposals will be destroyed.  Successful proposals will be retained in 
accordance with contract file regulations.  

5.8 Rights in Data Developed Under SBIR/STTR Contracts

Rights to data used in, or first produced under, any Phase I or Phase II contract are specified in the clause at FAR 
52.227-20, Rights in Data--SBIR/STTR Program.  The clause provides for rights consistent with the following:

5.8.1 Non-Proprietary Data.  Some data of a general nature are to be furnished to NASA without restriction (i.e., 
with unlimited rights) and may be published by NASA.  These data will normally be limited to the project 
summaries accompanying any periodic progress reports and the final reports required to be submitted.  The 
requirement will be specifically set forth in any contract resulting from this Solicitation.
5.8.2 Proprietary Data.  When data that is required to be delivered under a SBIR/STTR contract qualifies as 
“proprietary,” i.e., either data developed at private expense that embody trade secrets or are commercial or financial 
and confidential or privileged, or computer software developed at private expense that is a trade secret, the 
contractor, if the contractor desires to continue protection of such proprietary data, shall not deliver such data to the 
Government, but instead shall deliver form, fit, and function data.

5.8.3 Non-Disclosure Period.  The Government, for a period of 4 years from acceptance of all items to be delivered 
under a SBIR/STTR contract, shall use the data, i.e., data first produced by the contractor in performance of the 
contract, where such data are not generally known, and which data without obligation as to its confidentiality have 
not been made available to others by the contractor or are not already available to the Government, agrees to use 
these data for Government purposes.  These data shall not be disclosed outside the Government (including 
disclosure for procurement purposes) during the 4-year period without permission of the contractor, except that such 
data may be disclosed for use by support contractors under an obligation of confidentiality.  After the 4-year period, 
the Government has a royalty-free license to use, and to authorize others to use on its behalf, these data for 
Government purposes, but the Government is relieved of all disclosure prohibitions and assumes no liability for 
unauthorized use by third parties.

5.9 Copyrights

Subject to certain licenses granted by the contractor to the Government, the contractor receives copyright to any data 
first produced by the contractor in the performance of a SBIR/STTR contract.

5.10 Patents

The contractor may normally elect title to any inventions made in the performance of a SBIR/STTR contract.  The 
Government receives a nonexclusive license to practice or have practiced for or on behalf of the Government each 
such invention throughout the world.  To the extent authorized by 35 U.S.C. 205, the Government will not make 
public any information disclosing such inventions for a reasonable time to allow the contractor to file a patent 
application.

Costs associated with patent applications are not allowable.

5.11 Cost Sharing

Cost sharing is permitted, but not required for proposals under this Solicitation. Cost sharing, if included, should be 
shown in the summary budget but not in items labeled "AMOUNT REQUESTED." No profit will be paid on the 
cost-sharing portion of the contract.







5.12 Profit or Fee

Both Phase I and Phase II contracts may include a reasonable profit.  The reasonableness of proposed profit is de-
termined by the Contracting Officer during contract negotiations.
 
5.13 Joint Ventures and Limited Partnerships

Both joint ventures and limited partnerships are permitted, provided the entity created qualifies as a SBC in 
accordance with the definition in Section 2.1.  A statement of how the workload will be distributed, managed, and 
charged should be included in the proposal.  A copy or comprehensive summary of the joint venture agreement or 
partnership agreement should be appended to the proposal.  This will not count as part of the 25-page limit for the 
Phase I proposal.

5.14 Similar Awards and Prior Work

If an award is made pursuant to a proposal submitted under either SBIR or STTR Solicitation, the firm will be 
required to certify that it has not previously been paid nor is currently being paid for essentially equivalent work by 
any agency of the Federal Government.  Failure to acknowledge or report similar or duplicate efforts can lead to the 
termination of contracts or criminal or civil penalties.

5.15 Contractor Commitments

Upon award of a contract, the contractor will be required to make certain legal commitments through acceptance of 
numerous clauses in the Phase I contract.  The outline that follows illustrates the types of clauses that will be 
included.  This is not a complete list of clauses to be included in Phase I contracts, nor does it contain specific 
wording of these clauses.  Copies of complete provisions will be made available prior to contract negotiations.

5.15.1 Standards of Work.  Work performed under the contract must conform to high professional standards.  
Analyses, equipment, and components for use by NASA will require special consideration to satisfy the stringent 
safety and reliability requirements imposed in aerospace applications.

5.15.2 Inspection.  Work performed under the contract is subject to Government inspection and evaluation at all 
reasonable times.

5.15.3 Examination of Records.  The Comptroller General (or a duly authorized representative) shall have the right 
to examine any directly pertinent records of the contractor involving transactions related to the contract.

5.15.4 Default.  The Government may terminate the contract if the contractor fails to perform the contracted work.

5.15.5 Termination for Convenience.  The contract may be terminated by the Government at any time if it deems 
termination to be in its best interest, in which case the contractor will be compensated for work performed and for 
reasonable termination costs.

5.15.6 Disputes.  Any dispute concerning the contract that cannot be resolved by mutual agreement shall be decided 
by the contracting officer with right of appeal.

5.15.7 Contract Work Hours.  The contractor may not require a non-exempt employee to work more than 40 hours 
in a workweek unless the employee is paid for overtime.

5.15.8 Equal Opportunity.  The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment 
because of race, color, religion, age, sex, or national origin.

5.15.9 Affirmative Action for Veterans.  The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant 
for employment because he or she is a disabled veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era.

5.15.10 Affirmative Action for Handicapped.  The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or 
applicant for employment because he or she is physically or mentally handicapped.

5.15.11 Officials Not to Benefit.  No member of or delegate to Congress shall benefit from a SBIR or STTR 
contract.

5.15.12 Covenant Against Contingent Fees.  No person or agency has been employed to solicit or to secure the 
contract upon an understanding for compensation except bona fide employees or commercial agencies maintained 
by the contractor for the purpose of securing business.

5.15.13 Gratuities.  The contract may be terminated by the Government if any gratuities have been offered to any 
representative of the Government to secure the contract.

5.15.14 Patent Infringement.  The contractor shall report to NASA each notice or claim of patent infringement 
based on the performance of the contract.

5.15.15 American-Made Equipment and Products.  Equipment or products purchased under a SBIR or STTR 
contract must be American-made whenever possible.

5.16 Additional Information

5.16.1 Precedence of Contract Over Solicitation.  This Program Solicitation reflects current planning.  If there is 
any inconsistency between the information contained herein and the terms of any resulting SBIR/STTR contract, the 
terms of the contract are controlling.

5.16.2 Evidence of Contractor Responsibility.  Before award of a SBIR or STTR contract, the Government may 
request the offeror to submit certain organizational, management, personnel, and financial information to establish 
responsibility of the offeror.  Contractor responsibility includes all resources required for contractor performance, 
i.e., financial capability, work force, and facilities.

5.16.3 Central Contractor Registration:  Offerors should be aware of the requirement to register in the Central 
Contractor Registration database prior to contract award. To avoid a potential delay in contract award, offerors 
are strongly encouraged to register prior to submitting a proposal.

The Central Contractor Registration (CCR) database is the primary repository for contractor information required 
for the conduct of business with NASA. It is maintained by the Department of Defense. To be registered in the CCR 
database, all mandatory information, which includes the DUNS or DUNS+4 number, and a CAGE code, must be 
validated in the CCR system. The DUNS number or Data Universal Number System is a 9-digit number assigned by 
Dun and Bradstreet Information Services to identify unique business entities. The DUNS+4 is similar, but includes a 
4-digit suffix that may be assigned by a parent (controlling) business concern. The CAGE code or Commercial 
Government and Entity Code is assigned by the Defense Logistics Information Service (DLIS) to identify a 
commercial or Government entity.

The DoD has established a goal of registering an applicant in the CCR database within 48 hours after receipt of a 
complete and accurate application via the Internet. However, registration of an applicant submitting an application 
through a method other than the Internet may take up to 30 days. Therefore, offerors that are not registered should 
consider applying for registration immediately upon receipt of this solicitation. Offerors and contractors may obtain 
information on CCR registration and annual confirmation requirements via the Internet at http://www.ccr2000.com 
or by calling 888-CCR-2423 (888-227-2423).                                                                          

5.17 Property

In accordance with the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) Part 45, it is NASA's policy not to provide facilities 
(capital equipment, tooling, test and computer facilities, etc.) for the performance of work under contract.  An SBC

will furnish its own facilities to perform the proposed work as an indirect cost to the contract.  Special tooling 
required for a project may be allowed as a direct cost.

When an SBC cannot furnish its own facilities to perform required tasks, an SBC may propose to acquire the use of 
commercially available facilities.  Rental or lease costs may be considered as direct costs as part of the total funding 
for the project.  If unique requirements force an offeror to acquire facilities under a NASA contract, they will be 
purchased as Government Furnished Equipment (GFE) and titled to the Government. 

An offeror may propose the use of unique or one-of-a-kind NASA facilities if essential for the research.  Offerors 
requiring a NASA facility must clearly document and certify that there is no commercially available facility to 
perform the R&D.  It may be difficult, however, to ensure availability, and non-availability may lead to non-
selection.  Should an offeror propose the use of unique or one-of-a-kind NASA facilities essential for the R/R&D, an 
agreement with the responsible installation is required and costs for their use will be determined by the installation.  
These costs may be chargeable in accordance with the Government property clause of the contract.  Total contract 
costs must not exceed the Phase I and Phase II funding limits given in this Solicitation (Section 5.1).


6.  Submission of Proposals

6.1 The Submission Process

6.1.1 Submission Requirements.  NASA utilizes an electronic process for management of the SBIR/STTR pro-
grams.  This management approach requires that a proposing firm have Internet access and an e-mail address. 

6.1.2 What Needs to Be Submitted.  A proposal submission is comprised of two parts: 

(1) Internet Submission.  The entire proposal including Forms 9A, 9B and 9C must be submitted via the Internet 
(http://sbir.nasa.gov).   Firms may also submit an optional briefing chart, which is not included in the 25 page 
count.  An example chart has been provided in Appendix B. 
(2) Postal Submission.  Postal submission includes an original signed proposal with all required forms. 





Note:  Other forms of submissions such as fax, diskette, or e-mail attachments are not acceptable.

6.2 Internet Submission 

6.2.1 Electronic Technical Proposal Preparation.  The term “Technical Proposal” refers to the part of the submis-
sion as described in Section 3.2.4.

Word Processor.  NASA converts all technical proposal files to PDF format for evaluation purposes.  Therefore, 
NASA requests that technical proposals be submitted in PDF format, and encourages companies to do so.  Other 
acceptable formats for PC are AmiPro, ClarisWorks for Windows, MS Works, Text, MS Word, WordPerfect, and 
Postscript.  For Macintosh, the acceptable formats are ClarisWorks, MS Works, MacWrite Pro, Text, MS Word, 
WordPerfect, and Postscript.  Unix and TeX users please note that due to PDF difficulties with non-standard fonts, 
please output technical proposal files in DVI format. 

Graphics.  For reasons of space conservation and simplicity the offeror is encouraged, but not required, to embed 
graphics within the document.  For graphics submitted as separate files, the acceptable file formats (and their re-
spective extensions) are: Bit-Mapped (.bmp), Graphics Interchange Format (.gif), JPEG (.jpg), PC Paintbrush (.pcx), 
WordPerfect Graphic (.wpg), and Tagged-Image Format (.tif).  

Limitations.  While only the paper copy will be screened for administrative compliance, the various files compris-
ing the electronic version are required to exactly reflect the paper version. 
Virus Check.  The offeror is responsible for performing a virus check on each submitted technical proposal.  As a 
standard part of entering the proposal into the processing system, NASA will scan each submitted electronic techni-
cal proposal for viruses.  The detection, by NASA, of a virus on any submitted electronic technical proposal, 
may cause rejection of the proposal. 

6.2.2 Electronic Handbook.  An Electronic Handbook for submitting proposals via the internet is hosted on the 
NASA SBIR/STTR Homepage (http://sbir.nasa.gov).  The handbook will guide the firms through the various steps 
required for submitting a SBIR/STTR proposal and issue secure-user identification and passwords for each submis-
sion.  Communication between NASA and the firm will be via a combination of electronic handbooks and e-mail. 





6.3 Postal Submission

Postal Submissions are comprised of one original signed paper copy of the proposal, including paper copies of all 
original forms (as stated in Section 3.2.2)

6.3.1 Physical Packaging Requirements for Paper Copy of Proposal.  Do not use bindings or special covers.  
Staple the pages of the proposal in the upper left-hand corner only.  Secure packaging is mandatory.  NASA cannot 
process proposals damaged in transit.  All items for any proposal must be sent in the same envelope.  If more than 
one proposal is being submitted, each proposal must be in its own envelope, but all proposals may be sent in the 
same package.  Do not send duplicate packages of any proposal as "insurance" that at least one will be received. 





6.3.2 Where to Send Proposals.  All proposals that are mailed through the U.S. Postal Service first class, regis-
tered, or certified mail; proposals sent by express mail or commercial delivery services; or hand-carried proposals 
must be delivered to the following address between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. EDT: 

NASA SBIR/STTR Program Support Office
REI Systems, Inc 
4041 Powder Mill Road
Suite 311
Calverton (Beltsville), MD 20705-3106

The telephone number 301-937-0888 may be used when required for reference by delivery services:

6.3.3 Deadline for Proposal Receipt.  All proposal submissions (both internet and postal) must be received no 
later than 5:00 p.m. EDT on Wednesday, June 6, 2001 at the NASA SBIR/STTR Program Support Office.  
Any proposal received after that date and time shall be considered late and handled accordingly.   





6.4 Acknowledgment of Proposal Receipt

NASA will acknowledge receipt of proposals to the SBC Official’s e-mail address as provided on the proposal cover 
sheet.  If a proposal acknowledgment is not received within 14 days following the closing date of this Solicitation, 
the offeror should call NASA SBIR/STTR Program Support Office at 301-937-0888.  Information about proposal 
status will not be available until final selections are announced.


6.5 Withdrawal of Proposals

Proposals may be withdrawn by written notice, signed by the designated SBC Official.  Withdrawal notice must 
include proposal number and title.


7.  Scientific and Technical Information Sources

7.1 NASA SBIR/STTR Homepage

Detailed information on NASA's SBIR/STTR Programs is available at: http://sbir.nasa.gov.

7.2 NASA Commercial Technology Network

The NASA Commercial Technology Network (NCTN) contains a significant amount of on-line information about 
the NASA Commercial Technology Program.  The address for the NCTN homepage is: http://nctn.hq.nasa.gov/

7.3 NASA Technology Utilization Services

The National Technology Transfer Center (NTTC), sponsored by NASA in cooperation with other Federal agen-
cies, serves as a national resource for technology transfer and commercialization.  NTTC has a primary role to get 
Government research into the hands of U.S. businesses.  Its gateway services make it easy to access databases and to 
contact experts in your area of research and development.  For further information, call 800-678-6882.

NASA's network of Regional Technology Transfer Centers (RTTCs) provides business planning and develop-
ment services.  However, NASA does not accept responsibility for any services these centers may offer in the 
preparation of proposals.  RTTCs can be contacted directly as listed below to determine what services are available 
and to discuss fees charged.  Alternatively, to contact any RTTC, call 800-472-6785.

Northeast:
    Center for Technology Commercialization
    Massachusetts Technology Park
    1400 Computer Drive
    Westboro, MA  01581-5054
    Phone: 508-870-0042
    URL:    http://www.ctc.org
Mid-Atlantic:
    Technology Commercialization Center, Inc.
    12050 Jefferson Avenue
    Newport News, VA  23606
    Phone: 757-269-0025
    URL: http://www.teccenter.org
Southeast:
    Georgia Institute of Technology
    151 6th Street
216 O’Keefe Building
Atlanta, GA  30332
Phone: 404-894-6786
URL:  Currently Under Development

Mid-West:
    Great Lakes Industrial Technology Center
    Battelle Memorial Institute
    25000 Great Northern Corporate Center, Suite 450
    Cleveland, OH  44070-5310
    Phone: 440-734-0094
    URL:   http://www.battelle.org/glitec

Mid-Continent:
    Mid-Continent Technology Transfer Center
    Texas Engineering Extension Service
    Technology & Economic Development Division
 College Station, TX  77843-8000
 Phone: 409-845-2913
    URL:   http://www.mcttc.com/
Far-West:
    Far-West Technology Transfer Center
    University of Southern California
    3716 South Hope Street, Suite 200
    Los Angeles, CA  90007-4344
    Phone: 800-642-2872
    URL:   http://www.usc.edu/dept/engineering/TTC/NASA



7.4 United States Small Business Administration

The Policy Directives for the SBIR/STTR Programs, which also state the SBA policy for this Solicitation, may be 
obtained from the following source.  SBA information can also be obtained at: http://www.sba.gov/.

Office of Innovation, Research and Technology
U.S. Small Business Administration
409 Third Street, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20416
Phone: 202-205-7701

7.5 National Technical Information Service

The National Technical Information Service, an agency of the Department of Commerce, is the Federal 
Government's central clearinghouse for publicly funded scientific and technical information.  For information about 
their various services and fees, call or write:

National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA 22161
Phone: 800-553-6847
URL:  http://www.ntis.gov


8.  Research Topics for SBIR and STTR

8.1  SBIR Research Topics

Introduction

The SBIR Program Solicitation is aligned with the established NASA management structure of the Strategic 
Enterprises (http://www.nasa.gov).

The Enterprises identify, at the most fundamental level, what NASA does and for whom.  Each Strategic Enterprise 
is analogous to a strategic business unit employed by private-sector companies to focus on and respond to their 
customers' needs.  Each Strategic Enterprise has a unique set of goals, objectives, and strategies.  Research topics 
and subtopics in this Solicitation are organized by the five NASA Strategic Enterprises:

Aerospace Technology
Biological and Physical Research
Earth Science
Human Exploration and Development of Space
Space Science













This page has intentionally been left blank.








8.1.1  AEROSPACE TECHNOLOGY

NASA's Aerospace Technology Enterprise pioneers the identification, development, verification, transfer, applica-
tion, and commercialization of high-payoff aeronautics technologies.  It seeks to promote economic growth and 
security and to enhance U.S. competitiveness through safe, superior, and environmentally compatible U.S. civil and 
military aircraft and through a safe, efficient national aviation system.  In addition, the Enterprise recognizes that the 
space transportation industry can benefit significantly from the transfer of aviation technologies and flight opera-
tions to launch vehicles, the goal being reducing the cost of access to space.  The Enterprise will work closely with 
its aeronautics customers, including U.S. industry, the Department of Defense, and the Federal Aviation Admini-
stration, to ensure that its technology products and services add value, are timely, and have been developed to the 
level where the customer can confidently make decisions regarding the application of those technologies.

http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/aero

A1 AVIATION SAFETY	28
A1.01 Flight Deck Situation Awareness and Crew Systems Technologies	28
A1.02 Propulsion and Airframe Failure Data and Accident Mitigation	29
A1.03 Automated On-Line Health Management and Data Analysis	30
A1.04 Aircraft Icing Systems	30
A1.05 Non-destructive Evaluation and Health Monitoring of Structures and Materials	31
A2 AVIATION SYSTEM CAPACITY AND PRODUCTIVITY	32
A2.01 21st Century Air-Traffic Management	32
A2.02 Flight Technologies for Improved Aviation System Capacity	33
A2.03 Intelligent Aerospace Systems Management	33
A3 ENVIRONMENTAL COMPATIBILITY: NOISE AND EMISSIONS	34
A3.01 Airframe Systems Noise Prediction and Reduction	34
A3.02 Propulsion System Emissions and Noise Prediction and Reduction	35
A4 SMALL AIRCRAFT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM	36
A4.01 Small Aircraft Transportation System Technologies	36
A4.02 Small Aircraft Transportation System Propulsion Technologies	37
A5 ACCESS TO SPACE	38
A5.01 Advanced Space Transportation System Technologies	38
A5.02 Reusable Launch Vehicle Airframe Technologies	39
A5.03 Space Transportation System Manufacturing Technologies	40
A5.04 Space Propulsion Systems Test Operations	41
A6 IN-SPACE TRANSPORTATION	41
A6.01 High Energy Propulsion Technologies	42
A6.02 Propellantless Propulsion	42
A7 DESIGN AND ANALYSIS FOR AEROSPACE VEHICLES	42
A7.01 Modeling and Control of Complex Flows Over Aerospace Vehicles and Propulsion Systems	43
A7.02 Modeling and Simulation of Aerospace Vehicles in a Flight Test Environment	44
A7.03 Flight Sensors, Sensor Arrays and Airborne Instruments for Flight Research	44
A8 REVOLUTIONARY CONCEPTS IN AERONAUTICS (REVCON)	45
A8.01 Revolutionary Aerospace Vehicle Systems Concepts	45
A8.02 Revolutionary Technologies and Components for Propulsion Systems	46
A8.03 Revolutionary Flight Concepts	46
A1 Aviation Safety 

NASA is responsible for conducting the research that, upon implementation, will contribute to an 80 percent reduc-
tion in aviation accidents by 2007, and a 90 percent reduction in aviation accidents by 2017 relative to 1997. 
Accomplishment of these goals requires technical advances in the following areas: (1) Increased safety for all air-
craft flying in an atmospheric icing environment; (2) Prevention and/or mitigation of hazardous conditions during or 
after an aviation accident; (3) Enhanced flight deck situational awareness for the National Airspace System opera-
tors; (4) Automated on-line health management and data analysis for aircraft systems; (5) Innovative and 
commercially viable techniques for non-destructive evaluation and health monitoring of aircraft materials and 
structures. 

A1.01 Flight Deck Situation Awareness and Crew Systems Technologies 
Lead Center: LaRC 
Participating Center(s): None

Information technology has and will continue to provide operational opportunities toward increasing the safe and 
efficient use of the Airspace System. Significant challenges associated with this evolving technology include main-
taining or enhancing the situation awareness of system operators, developing user-centered technologies that 
facilitate human perception and interpretation and that counteract human information processing limitations and 
biases, and allowing for geographically and temporally distributed operators to work collaboratively. 

NASA seeks highly innovative crew systems technologies that will maintain or enhance situation awareness and aid 
operator decision-making for improved aerospace safety and efficiency. These technologies and methods may take 
the form of tools, models, techniques, procedures, substantiated guidelines, prototypes, and devices. In addition, we 
seek tools and methods for measuring and analyzing human and group performance in complex, dynamic systems. 
Innovative and economically attractive approaches are sought to advance the current state-of-the-art in the following 
areas: 

? Systems monitoring with sensitive informing, advisements, alerts, and aids for Airspace System operators that 
enhance situation awareness and improve aviation safety. 
? Crew-centered systems design methods and technologies. 
? Innovative crew-system interface technologies. 
? Human-error reduction in aircraft operations and systems monitoring.
? Error tolerant flight deck systems including advanced displays, crew-system interfaces, and monitoring tech-
nologies. 
? Human and group performance analysis methods and tools. 
? Human performance measurement technologies for use in operational environments.
? Collaborative and distributive decision making among Airspace System operators. 
? Integrated flight deck information systems and procedures. 
? Decision support technologies and methods to assist Airspace System operators that enhance situation aware-
ness and improve aviation safety. 
? Artificial Intelligence technologies and concepts that monitor crew and aircraft performance to ensure appropri-
ate levels of engagement, crew workload and situation awareness. 
? Human-centered information technologies that enhance situation awareness and performance of less experi-
enced Airspace System operators especially at critical times. 
? Development of human-centered information technology for intuitive guidance queues in advanced concepts. 
? Guidelines and measurement techniques that allow for successful assessment of the application of human-
centered design principles to flight deck display concepts.





 
A1.02 Propulsion and Airframe Failure Data and Accident Mitigation 
Lead Center: GRC
Participating Center(s): LaRC 

NASA is concerned with the prevention of hazardous and accident conditions and the mitigation of their effects 
when they do occur. One particular emphasis is on fire. The prevention, detection, and suppression of fires are criti-
cal goals of accident mitigation. Aircraft fires represent a small number of actual accidents, but the number of 
fatalities due to in-flight, post-crash and on-ground fires is large. 

A second emphasis is on crashworthiness. For all transport aircraft accidents, 45 percent of those which involve 
serious injuries or fatalities are survivable. Besides impact alone, survivability is often a function of the combined 
effects of subsequent fire and smoke. Technology is needed to further protect passengers from the effects of the 
crash or mitigate the after effects to allow the escape of passengers. 

A third emphasis is on mitigating the safety risk and collateral damage due to unexpected failures of rotating    
components. Although the FAA mandates a blade containment and rotor unbalance requirement (FAR Part 33, 
section 33.94) as part of the airworthiness standards for (turbine) aircraft engines, there are substantial potential 
(aircraft-engine) system benefits to be gained by enabling safety assured, lighter weight, lower cost, and more dam-
age tolerant designs for engine case/containment systems and associated (primary load path) structures. 

A final emphasis for this Solicitation is on propulsion system health management in order to prevent or      accom-
modate safety-significant malfunctions. Past advances in this area have helped improve the reliability and safety of 
aircraft propulsion systems. However, propulsion system component failures are still a contributing factor in numer-
ous aircraft accidents and incidents. Advances in instrumentation, health monitoring algorithms, and fault 
accommodating logic are sought which help to further reduce the occurrence of and/or mitigate the effects of safety-
significant propulsion system malfunctions. 

With these four emphases in mind, products and technologies are sought to mitigate or prevent relevant accidents, to 
enhance human survivability in the event of an accident, and to monitor system health. Considerations should be 
made for affordability and retrofitability to the commercial transport, general aviation, and rotorcraft fleets. These 
include the following areas: 

? Technology for fire prevention, detection, and suppression of potential in-flight fires in fuel tanks, insulation, 
cargo compartments, and other inaccessible locations.
? Technology to provide fuel tank vapor flammability reduction and on-board oxygen generation. 
? Technology to minimize fire hazards in crashes and to prevent or delay fires. For example: fuel-system modifi-
cations to eliminate spills, and on-demand suppression while not presenting a weight or performance penalty.
? Design and injury criteria and dynamic analyses to enhance crash safety. 
? Systems approach to crashworthy designs, which may include validated occupant/seat/structural interaction 
analyses. 
? Energy-absorbing seat and structural concepts and materials. 
? Technology for occupant protection in a crash, including advanced restraints and supplemental restraints. 
? Advanced material/structural configuration concepts to prevent catastrophic failures of engine components, or 
to ensure fragment containment. 
? Computational tools for analyzing blade-loss events and designing structural components/systems accordingly. 
? Health management technologies such as advanced instrumentation, health monitoring algorithms, and fault 
accommodating logic, to predict, diagnose, and prevent safety significant propulsion system malfunctions. 
? Low cost methods for failure prediction and testing of any of the above aircraft failure-prevention and mitiga-
tion technologies. 
? Methods for integrating any of the above aircraft failure-prevention and mitigation technologies into existing or 
new aircraft.


 

A1.03 Automated On-Line Health Management and Data Analysis 
Lead Center: DFRC 
Participating Center(s): None

On-line health monitoring is a critical technology for improving transportation safety in the 21st century. Safe, 
affordable, and more efficient operation of aerospace vehicles requires advances in online health monitoring of 
vehicle subsystems and information monitoring from many sources over local/wide area networks. On-line health 
monitoring is a general concept involving signal-processing algorithms designed to support decisions related to 
safety, maintenance, or operating procedures. The concept of on-line emphasizes algorithms that minimize the time 
between data acquisition and decision-making. 

This subtopic seeks solutions for on-line aircraft subsystem health monitoring. Solutions should exploit multiple 
computers communicating over standard networks where applicable. Solutions can be designed to monitor a specific 
subsystem or a number of systems simultaneously. 

Resulting commercial products might be implemented in a distributed decision-making environment such as a vir-
tual flight research center, a disciplinary-specific collaborative laboratory, an onboard diagnostics system, or a 
maintenance and inspection network of potentially global proportion. 
Proposers should discuss who the users of resulting products would be, e.g., research/test/ development; manufac-
turing; maintenance depots; flight crew; airports; flight operations or mission control; air traffic management; or 
airlines. Proposers are encouraged to discuss data acquisition, processing, and presentation components in their 
proposal. Examples of desired solutions targeted by this subtopic include: 

? Real-time autonomous sensor validity monitors
? Flight control system or flight path diagnostics for predicting loss of control 
? Automated testing and diagnostics of mission-critical avionics   
? Structural fatigue, life cycle, static, or dynamic load monitors 
? Automated nondestructive evaluation for faulty structural components
? Electrical system monitoring and fire prevention 
? Applications that exploit wireless communication technology to reduce costs 
? Model-reference or model-updating schemes based on measured data that operate autonomously 
? Proactive maintenance schedules for rocket or turbine engines, including engine life-cycle monitors 
? Predicting or detecting any equipment malfunction 
? Middleware or software toolkits to lower the cost of developing on-line health-monitoring applications 
? Innovative solutions for harvesting, managing, archival, and retrieval of aerospace vehicle health data 

A1.04 Aircraft Icing Systems 
Lead Center: GRC 
Participating Center(s): None

A major goal of the NASA Aircraft Icing Program is to increase the level of safety for all aircraft flying in the  
atmospheric icing environment. To maximize the level of safety, aircraft must be capable of handling all possible 
icing conditions by either avoiding or tolerating the conditions. Proposals are invited that lead to innovative new 
approaches or significant improvements in existing technologies for inflight icing condition avoidance (icing 
weather information systems) or tolerance (aircraft icing protection systems and design tools). Of particular interest 
are technologies that are compatible with emerging aircraft designs (i.e., sensitive electronic systems, digital flight 
decks, and advanced wing designs). Onboard systems must be aerodynamically non-intrusive , practical, and must 
consider weight, power, size, and cost for successful integration into aircraft. To receive consideration for funding, 
all proposals submitted under this subtopic must demonstrate significant advantages over existing technologies. The 
areas of greatest interest are: 

? New practical, inflight and/or ground-based, real-time remote sensing technologies for the measurement of the 
supercooled water droplet and temperature environment. The technology must be capable of quantifying the en-
vironment to allow for the prediction of the severity of airframe icing, and to identify potential avoidance and 
escape routes, and must have practical range (at least 20 km) and cloud penetration capability. The scanning 
update cycle rate needs to be on the order of 1 minute to account for rapid changes in the icing environment. 
Remote measurement systems must be capable of quantifying liquid water in both pure liquid clouds and those 
with ice crystals. 
? Dual or multi-band radar analysis techniques that can function in the Mie scattering regime for the remote 
measurement of icing conditions. 
? Radome technology for microwave wavelength radar and radiometers that remains completely clear of liquid 
water in all weather situations. 
? In situ icing environment measurement systems that can provide practical, very low cost validation data for 
emerging icing weather information systems and atmospheric modeling. Measured information must include lo-
cation, altitude, cloud liquid water content, temperature, and ideally cloud particle sizing and phase information. 
Possible solutions include multiple aircraft sampling and radiosonde based systems. 
? Low power and low cost anti-icing systems, including technologies that protect composite structures. A system 
must be capable of operating under all potential environmental conditions and should be capable of operating 
automatically or with minimal cockpit crew interaction. 
? Practical analysis tools for the integrated design and optimization of hot gas ice protection systems. The tool 
must model the entire heat path from source to protected surface, including the conduction path through the sur-
face and the water loading on the external surface. 

A1.05 Non-destructive Evaluation and Health Monitoring of Structures and Materials 
Lead Center: LaRC
Participating Center(s): ARC 

Innovative and commercially viable technologies are being solicited for the development of non-destructive evalua-
tion (NDE) and health-monitoring sensors and instrumentation. Concepts in computational models for signal 
processing and data interpretation to establish quantitative characterization and event determination are also of 
interest. Evaluation technologies may incorporate ultrasonics, laser ultrasonics, optics and fiber optics, shearogra-
phy, video optics and metrology, thermography, electromagnetics, acoustic emission, X-ray, management of digital 
NDE data, biomimetic, and nano-scale sensing approaches for structural health monitoring. There is additional 
specific interest in non-contacting, remote, rapid, and less geometry sensitive technologies that reduce acquisition 
costs or improve system sensitivity, stability, and operational costs. Advancements in integrated multi-functional 
sensor systems, autonomous inspection approaches, distributed/embedded sensors, roaming inspectors, and shape 
adaptive sensors are also specifically sought. 

Technologies may be applied to: 
? Adhesives, sealants, bearings, coatings, glasses, alloys, laminates, monolithics, material blends, and weldments 
? Thermal protection systems 
? Complex composite and hybrid structural systems 
? Low density and high temperature materials

Technologies may be used for: 
? Characterizing material properties 
? Assessing effects of defects in materials and structures 
? Evaluation of mass-loss in materials 
? Detecting cracks, porosity, foreign material, inclusions, corrosion, disbonds 
? Detecting cracks under bolts 
? Real time and in situ monitoring, reporting, and accumulated damage characterization for structural durability 
and life prediction/determination 
? Repair certification 
? Environmental sensing 
? Electronic system/wiring integrity assessment 
? Characterization of load environment on a variety of structural materials and geometries including thermal 
protection systems and bonded configurations 
? Identification of loads exceeding design 
? Monitoring loads for fatigue and preventing overloads 
? Suppression of acoustic loads 
? Early detection of damage 
? In situ monitoring and control of materials processing 

The anticipated structural applications to be considered for NDE and health monitoring development include a 
variety of high stress and hostile aero-thermo-chemical service environments projected for aerospace systems. 


A2 Aviation System Capacity and Productivity

A major NASA goal in global civil aviation is to triple the aviation system throughput in all weather conditions 
while maintaining safety. An additional goal is to significantly reduce the cost of air travel. These increases in the 
capacity and productivity of the National Airspace System (NAS) can be achieved through development of revolu-
tionary ground-based and airborne operations systems, new vehicle technologies and utilization of advanced 
computational approaches and information technology methodologies for aerospace system development. 

A2.01 21st Century Air-Traffic Management 
Lead Center: ARC 
Participating Center(s): None

Innovations in Air-Traffic Management (ATM) are required to make current systems more efficient as well as im-
prove the next generation National Airspace System (NAS). The challenge for the next generation ATM system is to 
accommodate growth in air traffic while reducing the aircraft accident rate by a factor of five within 10 years from 
1997, and by a factor of ten within 20 years. This can only be achieved by the development of decision support tools 
for controllers, pilots and airline operations, and by the introduction of technical innovations in communication, 
navigation, and surveillance (CNS). It requires a new look at the way airspace is managed and the automation of 
some crew functions, thereby intensifying the need for a careful integration of machine and human performance. In 
addition, advances in technologies such as Differential GPS (DGPS) and Automatic Dependent Surveillance-
Broadcasting (ADS-B) are revolutionizing aerospace operations. These and other advanced technologies will ad-
vance the development of Runway Independent Aircraft that do not require conventional runways, as well as, 
improve operations at existing airport infrastructures. These technologies show promise in enhancing the efficiency 
and safety of airport traffic management. Innovative and economically attractive approaches are sought to advance 
technologies in the following areas: 

? Decision support tools (DST) to assist pilots, controllers and dispatchers in all parts of the airspace (en route, 
terminal and surface) 
? Integration of DST across different airspace. Simulation and modeling tools to assess benefits of new concepts 
technologies and concepts leading to greater airborne operational independence 
? Methods of integrating air and ground roles and responsibilities 
? Distributed decision-making and its impact on the stability of the airspace 
? System robustness and safety: sensor failure, threat mitigation, health monitoring 
? Weather modeling and improved trajectory estimation for traffic management applications 
? New concepts in air space management and impact of Commercial Space Transportation on ATM 
? Role of data exchange and data link in co-operative decision-making 
? Modeling of the National Airspace System 
? Human factors and workload concepts relating to safe control/integration of aircraft and other ground vehicles 
systems 
? Distributed complex, real-time simulations 
? Environmentally friendly ATM and aircraft operations 
? Automation concepts for advanced ATM systems 
? Intelligent software architecture 
? Technologies and innovative methods to integrate simultaneous movement of the ground vehicles and the air-
craft fleet

? Operational products for Simultaneous Non-Interfering (SNI) approaches, departure and runway traffic 
? Intermodal Transportation technologies 

A2.02 Flight Technologies for Improved Aviation System Capacity 
Lead Center: ARC 
Participating Center(s): None

To achieve the NASA objective of tripling the aviation system capacity within 25 years, revolutionary changes to 
the current civil operational environment are envisioned. These changes include new and improved vehicle tech-
nologies to fully accomplish this objective. Runway-Independent Aircraft with a vertical or extremely-short takeoff 
and landing (ESTOL) flight capability will enable the mobility required to achieve door-to-door delivery of people, 
goods, and services within this new air transportation system. These vehicles must meet civil global aviation re-
quirements for safer, quieter, more efficient, and affordable aircraft. These requirements directly influence the 
Aerospace Technology objectives identified by NASA to support the Agency's mission. 

Many aspects of the aeromechanics and flight control of rotorcraft and powered-lift aircraft are not thoroughly 
understood or predictable enough to enable efficient and accurate design processes for economically-viable civil 
aircraft with a vertical flight capability. NASA requires innovative methods, approaches, and technologies that 
describe phenomena involved in rotorcraft and powered-lift aerodynamics, dynamics, acoustics and autonomous 
control; provide greater knowledge of the detailed characteristics of these phenomena; and permit well-verified 
designs. Innovative developments with applications to advanced tilt rotors, revolutionary powered-lift aircraft, a 
spectrum of helicopter configurations, personal vertical flight transportation vehicles, and hover-capable unmanned 
aerial vehicles of all sizes are needed to refine the next generation of civil aircraft that will meet civil global aviation 
requirements for safer, quieter, more efficient, and lower direct operating cost aircraft. These requirements directly 
impact the Research and Technology Programs identified by NASA to support the agency's objective of increased 
aviation system capacity as well as improved mobility, reduced noise, increased safety, and innovation in technol-
ogy and engineering. 

Examples of research topics currently of importance include: efficient design tools which reduce design cycle time; 
improved vehicle performance with reduction in ownership and operation costs; advanced active control strate-
gies/methodologies for aeromechanics, flight control, and enhanced vehicle capability; innovative solutions for 
reduction of airframe vibration, vibratory loads, and radiated noise; and technologies for improved safety. Adapta-
tion of emerging technologies such as biologically-inspired engineering, information technology, and nano- 
technologies is also encouraged. New analysis methodologies addressing the unique aspects of civil rotorcraft and 
powered-lift aircraft through CFD/CSM/CAA for individual and integrated vehicle systems are also sought. 

A2.03 Intelligent Aerospace Systems Management 
Lead Center: ARC
Participating Center(s): GRC 

With the dramatic increase in computational capability and information technology, several alternative approaches 
to traditional vehicular guidance, navigation, and control have been offered. These approaches include neural net-
works, annealing algorithms, biomimetics, and fuzzy logic. Many of these approaches have had specific applications 
in the aerospace industry, but less so than in other commercial industries. Safety is often cited as a contributing 
factor for this difference; however, that citation is becoming less defensible with the promulgation of these ideas 
into vehicles outside the aerospace domain. 

The objective of this subtopic is to both bolster and foster collaboration between the aerospace environs and these 
recent computational and informational approaches. Airborne vehicles of all types will be considered; however, 
emphasis on hovering and extremely short takeoff and landing powered-lift vehicles, both manned and unmanned, 
will be given. Technology innovations sought include: 

Unmanned aerial vehicle guidance and control
? Intelligent guidance for single or coordinated groups of vehicles with constraints 
? Use of genetic, simulated annealing, tabu search, or great deluge algorithms 
? Real-time optimal trajectory generation for aggressive maneuvering 
? Interactions between autonomous control and operator control 
? Fault tolerant methods (tradeoffs of parallel versus analytical redundancy) 

Flight control and integrated flight propulsion control 
? Stability and performance sensitivities for practical neural networks or fuzzy logic applications 
? Hybrid systems analysis 
? Biomimetic applications 

Helicopter flight control 
? Interactions between on-blade control for vibration and handling qualities 
? Rotor state feedback applications 
? Sensing and estimation tradeoffs of using rotor states versus using rigid mode lead filtering 
? Integrated flight and propulsion control with rotor RPM 

Open architecture information sharing 
? Platform independent, wireless flight test applications 
? Self-contained, wireless, airborne information devices with head mounted displays

 
A3 Environmental Compatibility: Noise and Emissions 

NASA has very aggressive goals for providing technologies that will ensure the noise and emissions environmental 
compatibility of future commercial aircraft. In particular, the noise goals are to reduce the perceived noise levels of 
future aircraft by a factor of two (10 EPNdB) within 10 years of 1997, and a factor of four (20 EPNdB) within 20 
years. The emissions goals are to reduce aircraft emissions by a factor of three within 10 years and a factor of five 
within 20 years. These goals are necessary to meet increasingly stringent local, national, and international noise and 
emission regulations while enhancing operating safety and productivity and increasing aviation system throughput. 
Accomplishment of these goals will require revolutionary airframe and propulsion technologies to be developed and 
handed off to the aerospace community in a timely fashion. Particular areas of interest are: (1) Noise prediction and 
reduction technologies for propulsion source noise, nacelle aeroacoustics, airframe noise, and noise minimal flight 
procedures for future subsonic and supersonic commercial aircraft. (2) Aircraft interior noise reduction technologies 
to improve passenger and crew comfort. (3) Emissions reduction technologies for ultra low NOx emissions com-
bustor concepts which also reduce the aerosol and particulates emissions. (4) Innovative airframe and propulsion 
concepts relative to these goals. 

A3.01 Airframe Systems Noise Prediction and Reduction 
Lead Center: LaRC 
Participating Center(s): None

Innovative technologies and techniques are necessary for the introduction of efficient, environmentally acceptable 
airplanes, rotorcraft and advanced aerospace vehicles. Improvements in noise prediction and control technologies 
are needed for jet, propeller, rotor, fan, turbomachinery, and airframe noise sources to reduce the impact on commu-
nity residents, aircraft passengers and crew, and launch vehicle payloads. Innovations in technologies and algorithms 
for the following specific areas are solicited: 

? Fundamental and applied computational fluid-dynamics techniques for aeroacoustic analysis, particularly for 
use early in the design process. 
? Simulation and prediction of aeroacoustic noise sources particularly for airframe noise sources and situations 
with significant interactions between airframe and propulsion systems.
? Innovative active and passive acoustic treatment concepts for engine nacelle liners. 
? Technologies for active and passive control of aeroacoustic noise sources for Blended Wing Body and other 
advanced aircraft. 
? Reduction technologies and prediction methods for rotorcraft and advanced propeller aerodynamic noise. 
? Computational and analytical structural acoustics techniques for aircraft and advanced aerospace vehicle inte-
rior noise prediction, particularly for use early in the airframe design process. 
? Technologies and techniques for active and passive interior noise control for aircraft and advanced aerospace 
vehicle structures. 
? Prediction and control of high-amplitude aeroacoustic loads on advanced aerospace structures and the resulting 
dynamic response and fatigue. 
? Development and application of flight procedures for reducing community noise impact of rotorcraft and future 
subsonic and supersonic commercial aircraft while maintaining safety, capacity and fuel efficiency. 

A3.02 Propulsion System Emissions and Noise Prediction and Reduction 
Lead Center: GRC 
Participating Center(s): None

Emissions: Current environmental concerns with subsonic and supersonic aircraft center around global warming and 
the impact on the Earth's climate and, if not addressed, may threaten future market growth. Carbon dioxide (CO2) 
and oxides of nitrogen (NOx) are the major emittants of concern coming from commercial aircraft engines. CO2 is a 
greenhouse gas which may impact the warming of the Earth's climate. NOx emissions can destroy ozone in the 
upper atmosphere which protects humans from harmful uv radiation from the Sun and NOx can produce ozone in 
the lower atmosphere. Around airports, it appears as smog and causes breathing and health problems. Current state-
of-the-art engines and combustors in most subsonic aircraft are fuel efficient and meet the 1996 ICAO NOx limits. 
The Kyoto Agreement is applying pressure for additional CO2 reductions, and Europe and the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency are applying pressure for additional NOx reductions at takeoff and possibly cruise conditions. 
Stringent CO2 and NOx limits could result in emissions' fees or limited access to some countries. Also, recent ob-
servations of aircraft exhaust contrails (from both subsonic and supersonic flights) have resulted in growing concern 
over aerosol, particulate, and sulfur levels in the fuel. In particular, aerosols and particulates from aircraft are sus-
pected of producing high altitude clouds which could adversely affect the Earth's climatology. NASA has set some 
very aggressive goals for reducing emissions of future aircraft by a factor of three within 10 years and by a factor of 
five within 20 years. Advanced concepts research for reducing CO2 and NOx, and analytical and experimental 
research in characterization (intrusive and non-intrusive) and control (through component design, controls, and/or 
fuel additives) of gaseous, liquid and particulates of aircraft exhaust emissions is sought. Specific aircraft operating 
conditions of interest include the landing-takeoff cycle as well as the in-flight portion of the mission. Areas of par-
ticular interest are:
 
? New concepts for reducing carbon dioxide, oxides of nitrogen (NO, NO2, NOx), unburned hydrocarbons; 
carbon monoxide, particulate, and aerosols emittants (novel propulsion concepts, injector designs to improve 
fuel mixing, catalysts, additives, etc.); 
? New fuels for commercial aircraft which minimize carbon dioxide emissions; 
? Innovative active control concepts for emission minimization with an integrated systems focus including emis-
sion modeling for control, sensing and actuation requirements, control logic development, and experimental 
validation are of interest; and 
? New instrumentation techniques are needed for the measurement of engine emissions such as NOx, SOx, HOx, 
atomic oxygen and hydrocarbons in combustion facilities and engines. Size, size distributions, reactivity, and 
constituents of aerosols and particulates are needed, as are temperature, pressure, density, and velocity meas-
urements. Optical techniques that provide 2-D and 3-D data; time history measurements; and thin film, fiber 
optic, and MEMS-based sensors are of interest. 

Noise: NASA intends to provide enabling technologies to reduce the perceived noise levels of future aircraft by a 
factor of two (10 EPNdB) from 1997 technology aircraft by 2007, and a factor of four (20 EPNdB) by 2022. These 
goals are necessary to meet increasingly stringent local, national and international community noise regulations 
while enhancing operating safety and productivity and increasing aviation system throughput. Engine noise reduc-
tion technologies are required in the areas of propulsion source noise, nacelle aeroacoustics, and engine/airframe 
integration. These aggressive aircraft noise reduction goals will require revolutionary advances in propulsion tech-
nologies. Some of the key technologies needed to achieve these goals are revolutionary propulsion systems for 
reduced noise without significant increases in cost and emissions. Noise reduction concepts need to be identified that 
provide economical alternatives to conventional propulsion systems. NASA is soliciting proposals in one or more of 
the following areas for Propulsion System Noise Reduction: 

? Innovative acoustic source identification techniques for turbomachinery noise. The technique shall be described 
and demonstrated on a relevant source. A simple source may be used where the solution is known to demon-
strate the technique. A clear explanation on how the technique can be applied to turbofan engines should be 
included. The technique should be capable of identifying sources contributing to dominant engine components, 
such as fan and jet noise. Fan Noise: The technique shall be capable of separating fan sources such as fan-alone 
versus fan/stator interaction for both tones and broadband noise. Sufficient resolution is needed to determine the 
location of the dominant sources on the aerodynamic surfaces. Jet Noise: The technique shall be capable of     
locating both internal and external mixing noise for dual-flow nozzles found in modern turbofans. 
? Innovative turbofan source reduction techniques. Methods shall emphasize noise reduction methods for fan, jet 
and core components without compromising performance for turbofan engines. A resulting engine system that 
incorporates one or more of the proposed methods should be capable of reducing perceived noise levels any-
where from 10 to 20 EPNdB relative to FAR 36, Stage 3 certification levels.

Advanced Materials for Reduced Emissions: Proposals are also sought to address advanced materials, their devel-
opment, and their application to primary propulsion systems such as aircraft gas turbines, rocket and turbine based 
combined cycle engines, and rocket engines as well as auxiliary power sources in aircraft and space vehicles. Mate-
rials of interest include any especially used in propulsion systems such as high temperature polymers, nickel base 
alloys, ceramic matrix composites, coatings for these, and processes for their economical and reliable preparation. 


A4 Small Aircraft Transportation System 

Numerous factors combine to create opportunities for a small aircraft transportation system for business and      
personal travel in the 21st century. These include a rapid growth in the use of air travel (creating safety and afforda-
bility issues and increasing pressure on National Airspace System (NAS) capacity for operations by the Government 
and private sector users), declining numbers of communities served by scheduled air carriers, increasingly stringent 
international environmental standards, an aging fleet of small aircraft, and aggressive foreign competition. NASA 
seeks innovative technologies supporting advances in flight systems, airspace and ground systems infrastructure, 
integrated design and manufacturing and aircraft configuration design concepts as well as general aviation propul-
sion technologies. 

A4.01 Small Aircraft Transportation System Technologies 
Lead Center: LaRC 
Participating Center(s): None

NASA seeks innovative technologies to support advances for small aircraft transportation systems that substantially 
increase the demand for retrofit of existing aircraft, new aircraft and airport and airspace utilization. Of specific 
interest are advanced, affordable, certifiable technologies for human-factors engineered display of flight information 
for total situational awareness and simplified integration of flight controls with displays and propulsion systems. In 
addition, innovations are desired in cost-effective, user-friendly improvements in the graphical display of weather, 
traffic, and NAS facilities’ information services in the cockpit. NASA also seeks innovations in manufacturing 
methods and materials that can radically reduce the unit cost of small aircraft. Specifically, proposals are sought for 
the following areas: 

Aircraft Configuration 
? Advanced concepts that reduce the landing speed for FAR Part 23 aircraft under 6,000 pounds by half. Ad-
vanced concepts for roadable aircraft are also desired. This category must include a sound business plan for 
production with a technical plan providing for compatibility with the emerging National Airspace System ar-
chitecture and a certification plan to meet at least one of the following applicable FARs: Part 103 (Ultra-lite 
vehicle), Part 21.24 (Primary Category Aircraft), Part 23 (Certified Aircraft) or Part 27 (Rotorcraft), or Part 
21.191 Advisory Circular AC No: 20-27 series (Experimental Homebuilt Aircraft). 

Flight System Technologies, Information Systems and Pilot Vehicle Interface 
? Cost-effective advances in emerging navigation and graphical weather displays, graphical depiction methods, 
intuitive cockpit display systems with emphasis on pilot-display interface, flight controls, voice interface, port-
able and wearable display technologies, communications and human factors engineering technologies to aid 
pilot decision-making and to reduce cockpit workload. 

Certifiable Off-the-Shelf System Hardware and Software 
? Affordable cockpit systems including sensors, attitude-heading reference systems, terrain, obstacle, and hazard-
ous weather avoidance systems, and applications for standardized data bus system architectures such as 
firmware, software, design and maintenance tools, and flight information and management products for airplane 
systems status and flight planning.

Airspace Infrastructure 
? Advances and innovations in digital high-speed, high-bandwidth communications, and intelligent system design 
for automated, collaborative decision making, and systems for collision avoidance. 

Integrated Design and Manufacturing 
? Innovative manufacturing methods and materials providing significant advances in the cost, safety, weight, and 
cabin comfort for general aviation aircraft through materials technology, structural designs and assembly, and 
crash-worthiness. All proposals should include supportability plans (support infrastructure, maintenance re-
quirements, operations, and training), certification plans (cite specific FARs), compatibility with current and 
future airspace architecture, and a clear path to commercialization. 

A4.02 Small Aircraft Transportation System Propulsion Technologies 
Lead Center: GRC 
Participating Center(s): None

NASA seeks proposals that offer small aircraft dramatic improvements in acquisition and life-cycle costs, perform-
ance, safety and reliability, environmental compatibility (noise, emissions and fuel), ease of operation and passenger 
comfort through innovative propulsion concepts and/or integration of innovative propulsion technologies. In all 
cases, the offeror must demonstrate acquisition and life-cycle costs that are at least comparable to current propulsion  
system costs. Anticipated benefits must be defined using appropriate theoretical and experimental data. An under-
standing of the basis of the technology innovation and its application to aircraft engines must be demonstrated. 
Offerors must address commercialization potential. Paths to FAA certification must be described. Proposals are 
sought in the following areas: 

Propulsion Technologies 
NASA seeks propulsion technologies for small aircraft that will result in substantial improvements over those tar-
geted in the NASA General Aviation Propulsion program. Any improvements in areas such as performance, safety, 
and environmental compatibility must be accomplished with affordability as a prime consideration. Substantially 
reduced costs, at least 75 percent less than 1997 systems, are highly preferred. Advanced technologies which could 
lead to advantageous alternate propulsion systems and fuels (e.g., electric propulsion, hydrogen fuel, etc.) are also 
sought. Offeror must provide strong rationale for the viability and affordability of the propulsion concept which 
would use the proposed technology, and show substantial benefits over conventional propulsion systems. It is recog-
nized that unconventional propulsion systems will likely be long term developments, however, it is highly preferred 
that the specified technology development addressed by the offeror have an application which could be commer-
cialized in the nearer term. 

Propulsion System Control and Health Monitoring Technology 
NASA seeks proposals for low cost electronic engine control and health monitoring system technologies which 
substantially reduce pilot workload, fuel consumption, and engine emissions, and increase safety, reliability, and 
time between overhaul (TBO). Engine diagnostics should focus on pilot notification of engine status and operability, 
post-flight diagnostic methods, trend analysis, maintenance aides, and automatic fault accommodation. Much of this 
technology already exists, but it is too costly and/or too costly to certify for light aircraft. In some cases, cost reduc-
tions by orders of magnitude must be achieved. Development of methods for using commercially available high 
volume hardware and achieving low cost software production and validation is encouraged. 
A5 Access to Space 

Of paramount importance is the increase in safety and reliability of our space transportation systems and our goal is 
to increase flight safety by two orders of magnitude within 10 years from 1997 and by four orders of magnitude in 
25 years. Goals also include reducing the payload cost to low earth orbit by an order of magnitude, from $10K to 
$1K per pound, within 10 years from 1997 and from $1K to $100's per pound by 2025. 

A5.01 Advanced Space Transportation System Technologies 
Lead Center: MSFC
Participating Center(s): ARC 

Second and third generation reusable launch vehicle (RLV) systems will require high propellant mass fraction, high 
thrust to weight propulsion, reliable system performance, extended reusability, autonomous operation, and efficient 
pre-mission planning in order to achieve cost and crew safety goals. This subtopic emphasizes innovative hardware 
concepts, subsystems, and design and analysis tools to support development of next generation launch vehicles 
while lowering operations cost and improving crew safety. Methodology, design and analysis tools, and hardware 
developed under this subtopic should address technical issues related to propellant tanks, propulsion subsystems, 
thermal control subsystems, thermal protection systems, structures, guidance, navigation, and control (GN&C), fluid 
dynamics, supporting discipline analysis, and launch vehicle systems integration issues. Specific areas of interest for 
technology advancement and innovation include the following: 

? Low-cost, lightweight design concepts for propellant tanks and vehicle structures to lower overall vehicle 
structural mass fraction. 
? Control and health management of vehicle and propulsion structural systems by using sensors and effectors that 
have little influence on the structural system parameters with the exception of the structural damping parame-
ters. This also includes real time health monitoring and control of propulsion systems, reliable lightweight 
sensors, real time data handling techniques, and associated recognition software. 
? Systems to provide continuous estimation of center of mass and inertial properties along with real-time tuning 
of control algorithms to reflect known changes in vehicle response or sensor performance, and accurate, con-
tinuous estimation of fuel remaining on board. 
? Advanced concepts and techniques to meet thermal control requirements of various launch vehicle subsystems 
and payload thermal requirements. 
? Innovative thermal protection system concepts such as advanced microencapsulated phase change materials to 
support RLV thermal protection system coating applications, instrumentation analysis tools, and testing tech-
niques applicable to RLVs, cryo-tanks, and vehicle base heat shield regions. 
? Innovative vehicle preliminary design tools that support the design, analysis, and integration of vehicle subsys-
tems and propulsions systems into the vehicle (such as the ability to assess operability of the overall launch 
vehicle concept and to model the impacts of design changes on vehicle cost, operations, crew safety, vehicle 
aerodynamics, and controllability). These tools would significantly enhance the overall systems engineering 
evaluation of potential RLV concepts. 
? Integrated CAD, solid-model, structural, dynamic, thermal, and fluid-flow, analysis methods for multi-
disciplinary analysis and optimization of subsystems, components, and overall launch vehicles; and improved 
vehicle analysis tools in the areas of stress, thermal, structural, fluid dynamics, and acoustics. 
? Manufacturing and testing techniques that will allow for significant reduction in the cost and schedule required 
to perform wind tunnel aerodynamic testing of candidate RLV configurations. 
? Automated propellant management systems; and technologies and innovative engineering capabilities to pro-
duce propulsion storage, feed, pressurization, fill and drain, vent, and support/restraint systems that are robust, 
lighter, or require less volume. 
? Optimal fault detection and redundancy management strategies; execution software and advanced navigation 
hardware/software architectures; and adaptive GN&C utilizing data from sensors such as GPS. 
? Advanced guidance concepts that will reduce operational costs and increase reliability by autonomously re-
shaping trajectories and retargeting landing sites in the presence of abort/failure situations to satisfy vehicle and 
control constraints and to achieve a safe abort. 
? Advanced control concepts that will reduce operational costs and increase reliability by adapting to changing 
missions/payloads/vehicle models/failures and abort scenarios without requiring ground effort for retuning and 
analysis. 
? Automated mission planning techniques for planning flight operations of RLVs, including trajectory planning, 
launch window and timeline determination, generation of initialization loads, and verification that the GN&C 
will successfully fly the vehicle. 
? Analysis and testing techniques for prediction and measurement of damage and stress including life prediction, 
progressive internal damage and dynamic response in structures containing ceramic-matrix, metal-matrix com-
posites, or other composite materials; and nondestructive evaluation of structural integrity of vehicle subsystem 
and component materials. Methods for efficient characterization of frequency response functions of large 
structures, and analysis and testing techniques for passive and active vibration isolation devices for launch vehi-
cles and payloads. 
? Advanced methods and tools for prediction of dynamic and unsteady environments applicable to RLV systems 
and components. Methods to predict and evaluate the internal fluctuating environments of propellant delivery 
systems, dynamic contribution of cavitating pumps, and vehicle/engine system dynamic stability. Methods to 
predict and evaluate steady and unsteady external environments of complex vehicle/engine combinations related 
to geometrically complex external aerodynamics, engine start/launch overpressures, and flow dynamics noise. 
? Advanced technologies for integrated structural systems such as integrated thermal and structural cryogenic 
tanks, efficient and effective repair techniques, technologies for modal, acoustic and static testing of large-scale 
aerospace structural systems, experimental-empirical methods for composite material thermal characterization 
and response prediction. 
? Advanced airbreathing/rocket based combined cycle engine concepts or other combined cycle concepts. Tech-
nologies critical to the implementation of such concepts, such as liquid air production or detonation physics, are 
also of interest. These advanced cycle concepts should have a clear advantage over existing all rocket propul-
sion systems. 

A5.02 Reusable Launch Vehicle Airframe Technologies 
Lead Center: LaRC
Participating Center(s): MSFC 

Next generation space transportation systems must address the significant challenge of significantly reducing the 
cost of space access while providing orders-of-magnitude improvements in safety. To accomplish these goals, the 
airframes/spaceframes for future launch vehicles and upper stages must be reusable and incorporate advanced tech-
nologies in materials and structural concepts, validated, safe structural analysis and design technologies, and 
improved manufacture of large-scale, advanced structures; and must utilize advanced control, health monitoring, and 
maintenance technologies to enable low cost and safe operations. To facilitate the improvement of safety, the un-
certainties in airframe loads, responses and failure mechanisms must also be reduced so that design margins that 
contribute to safety can be quantified with an accuracy much greater than is possible today. The conflicting require-
ments of low cost and safety must also be balanced with the need for performance sufficient for space transportation 
vehicles. 

Airframe systems of primary interest in this subtopic include innovative concepts in reusable cryogenic propellant 
tanks, and "integrated thermal structures" (i.e., airframe structures, such as integral cryogenic tanks, intertanks, 
wings/fins, thrust structures, fairings, control surfaces and leading edges that are hot structures or have the reentry 
thermal protection system closely integrated with the structure). Proposals for innovative research in design and 
mechanics, and in materials technologies addressing these airframe systems are solicited. Proposals of specific 
interest in this subtopic include one or more of the following items: 

Design and Mechanics 
? Specialized modeling, analysis, and design tools for integrated structural, thermal, thermal-structural, or acous-
tic responses, and innovative measurement and test methods for design validation. Application of methodology 
to circular and multi-lobed, membrane cryogenic tanks, and for conformal, non-membrane tanks is of special  
interest. 
? Novel methods for prediction and testing of material and structural durability and damage tolerance with em-
phasis on cryogen leakage, environmental degradation, combined thermal-mechanical loads, and operation 
beyond nominal design conditions; and related methods to repair damaged structures. 

Materials Technologies 
? Significant advances in critical properties for high-temperature nickel, iron, and titanium alloys, intermetallics, 
refractory metals, Polymer Matrix Composites (PMCs), Ceramic Matrix Composites (CMCs), Metals and Metal 
Matrix Composites (MMCs) along with their related processing into useful product forms for fabrication into 
the airframe systems of interest.
? Materials technologies focused on advanced, high temperature materials compatible with cryogenic and gaseous 
hydrogen and oxygen; and for composite tanks, focused on cryogen leakage prevention and/or detection and/or 
sealing. 
? Practical processing methods for large-scale manufacture of cryogenic tanks with efficient and reliable joining, 
and process development for advanced forming such as out-of-autoclave manufacture for composites, and near-
net-shape and free-form fabrication for metals. 

A5.03 Space Transportation System Manufacturing Technologies 
Lead Center: MSFC 
Participating Center(s): None

Innovative manufacturing, materials, and processes technologies are sought for increasing safety and reducing cost 
and weight of space transportation propulsion, launch vehicle, and spacecraft systems and components. NASA is 
seeking research proposals in four major areas: Polymer Matrix Composites (PMCs), Ceramic Matrix Composites 
(CMCs), Metals and Metal Matrix Composites (MMCs), and Intelligent Synthesis Environment (ISE) for manufac-
turing. However, functionally formed components are also of interest (e.g., composed of a CMC and PMC, high to 
low thermal conductivity materials, etc.). As appropriate, proposals should justify selection of material constituents 
for process development, provide flexible, process development matrix correlated to test matrices, verify processes 
with microscopic analysis (e.g., microprobe, SEM, XRD, etc.) and macroscopic analysis (e.g., tensile strength, 
interlaminar shear strength, thermal and physical properties, etc.), explain how aspects of similar, previous efforts 
are leveraged, verify specific end-use application by testing for permeability, thermal shock, etc., and explain key 
issues and how mitigated. For those efforts that fabricate components, plans are sought which describe how the 
component will handle the potential system requirements (e.g., how components/structures are joined, manifolded, 
integrally and specifically function, etc.) and describe component/coupon nondestructive evaluation plans. Also, any 
plans necessary for manufacturing scale-up for target components should be described and deliverables listed. De-
liverables that are sought include: Components/systems, test data (component, stress-strain curves, shear, etc.), 
material analyses (microscopic analysis, etc.), and coupon samples for testing and analysis as appropriate. Proposers 
should strive to develop processes that ensure worker saftey and health. 

PMCs: Advancement in the following areas to promote the utilization of advanced polymer matrix composite  
materials in structures, components, and systems include, but are not limited to: Large scale manufacturing, non-
autoclave curing, especially automated fabrication, techniques using e-beam, thermoplastics, or other in situ tech-
nologies for providing damage tolerant and repairable structures, development of materials and manufacturing 
processes compatible with Fuels/Oxidizers, and technologies for bonding PMCs. 

CMCs: CMCs composed of fibers selected by end users such as high strength carbon fibers, SiC fibers, etc. are 
desired. Advanced fiber interface coatings yielding optimal composite life and composite performance with respect 
to cost and time for fabrication are also desired. The following areas for CMCs are of interest, but not limited to: 
pressure containment vessels (e.g., lining for turbopump housings, tanks, and integral injector and thrust chambers-
with/without active cooling), cooled panels, inter-engine seals for CMC nozzles, inserted blades for turbine disks, 
and process and component operation health monitoring preforms, and low cost (with metrics) rapid, scalable, re-
peatable fabrication processes. 

Metals and MMCs: Advanced low-cost manufacturing processes such as pressure infiltration casting, laser engi-
neered near net shaping, and electron beam physical vapor deposition are desired. These processes and joining 
techniques for manufacturing metallic or metal matrix composite (MMC) propulsion system components should 
target increasing specific strength, specific stiffness, and temperature and oxidizing or high pressure hydrogen envi-
ronments. Develop and optimize metallic matrix alloy compositions for MMCs with unique properties such as high 
specific strength, high ductility and good joinability (welding/brazing). The following aspects are to be considered: 
Alloy type (aluminum, Copper, Haynes 214, Mg, nanophase alloys), reinforcement material (Al2O3, SiC, B4C), 
reinforcement type (particulate, fiber, hybrid, functionally graded). Advanced joining of metallic and MMC materi-
als is also sought for the previously mentioned areas, in addition to bonding and joining of similar and dissimilar 
materials. 

ISE: Developments in ISE and collaborative engineering tools for manufacturing are solicited. Emphasis is placed 
on: "The Manufacturing Element" of life cycle product development including virtual product development,     
information-based systems, web-based manufacturing, biomimetic or self-assembly processes, virtual product de-
velopment and manufacturing simulation, science-based manufacturing, in addition to process control and 
instrumentation for characterization and verification of material properties (including thermal, optical, electrical, 
mechanical, and moisture absorption). 

A5.04 Space Propulsion Systems Test Operations 
Lead Center: SSC 
Participating Center(s): None

Proposals are solicited for innovative concepts in the area of propulsion test operations. Proposal should support the 
reduction of overall propulsion test operations costs (recurring costs) and/or increase reliability and performance of 
ground test facilities and operations methodologies. Specific areas of interest in this subtopic include the following: 

Improvements in Ground Test Operations, Safety and Reliability 
? New innovative non-intrusive sensors for measuring flow rate, temperature, pressure, rocket plume constituents, 
effluent gas detection, hydrogen gas and hydrogen fire detection.
? Improved cryogenic propellant conditioning methods. 

Facility and Test Article Health Monitoring Technologies 
? Intelligent sensor technology: self-diagnosing, self-calibrating, self-installing, sensors as networked devices 
capable of operating remotely.
? Software environments to implement an Intelligent Health Monitoring and Diagnostics System (IHMDS) that 
can ensure efficient operation and integrity of every element in a test stand (elements include sensors, assem-
blies, components, processes, and procedures). 
? Network protocol implementations for fast communication and data transfer for use by networked intelligent 
devices (sensors, controllers, etc.). 
? Small wireless communications for remote sensing and control. 
? Smart system components (control valves, regulators, and relief valves) that provide real-time closed-loop 
control, component configuration, automated operation, and component health. 
? Cryogenic propellant transfer system operation technologies which include automated propellant transfer, 
automated propellant-line (liquid hydrogen) purge systems, and automated and/or manual propellant-line quick-
disconnect systems. 
? Cryogenic storage tank lifetime monitor systems for temperature cycles, stress, acoustics, pressure, and shock. 


A6 In-Space Transportation 

Opening the space frontier for exploration, science and commerce will require breakthroughs in in-space transporta-
tion technologies. Over half of all spacecraft launched have a final destination beyond low Earth orbit and require 
some sort of in-space transportation system to get them there. Traditional chemical propulsion systems are inade-
quate to meet the needs of the next generation of space exploration missions. New technologies or innovative 
applications of existing technologies for in-space transportation that potentially result in increases in safety and 
reliability, significantly lower costs, reduced trip times and/or increased payload mass fractions are sought. Trans-
portation technologies to meet these goals can generally be divided into two categories: those utilizing high-energy 
power sources for thrust and those that obtain propulsion through interaction with the natural environment of space 
or offboard energy. High Energy Electric and Plasma Propulsion systems can include electrostatic and electromag-
netic propulsion, thermal propulsion (fission or solar derived), as well as more futuristic systems based on beamed 
power, fusion, antimatter, nuclear isomers, and other high-energy density technologies. Propellantless Propulsion 
systems include solar, plasma, and beamed energy sails; electrodynamic and momentum transfer tethers and eleva-
tors; aeroassist, aerocapture, and aerogravity techniques. Technologies that are supportive of these advanced 
transportation technologies at either the system or subsystem level are of interest. Technologies that support both 
NASA and commercial space needs are of particular interest. 

A6.01 High Energy Propulsion Technologies 
Lead Center: MSFC
Participating Center(s): GRC 

This subtopic focuses on high energy space transportation propulsion technologies, devices, and systems that could 
dramatically improve space transportation capability, cost, safety, and reliability and could lead to ambitious robotic 
and human exploration of the solar system and beyond. Proposals are solicited for innovative research related to 
high energy, high efficiency space propulsion. Technologies that can be applied to high-payoff commercial applica-
tions are of particular interest. Proposals should include analyses addressing feasibility and mission suitability, and 
plans for demonstrating concept feasibility via test/experiment. Areas of interest include:
 
? Systems, subsystems, and components needed to enable high efficiency (Isp is greater than 2000 s) in-space 
propulsion systems with overall propulsion system specific power exceeding 200 W/kg at any point in the solar 
system. 
? Fission propulsion systems, components, and technologies that enable high performance. Technologies may 
include safety and control systems, innovative radiation shielding techniques, light weight waste heat radiation 
systems, thermal management systems, and other major system components. 
? Fissile fuels and materials required to enable high efficiency, high specific power in-space propulsion systems. 
Fissile fuels and materials required to enable high thrust-to-weight nuclear thermal rockets with a mission-
averaged specific impulse exceeding 875s. 
? Futuristic propulsion systems based on fusion (non-tritium based), antimatter, or other advanced high energy 
processes. Technologies may include pulsed and steady-state fusion propulsion concepts or components and 
hybrid systems. 

A6.02 Propellantless Propulsion 
Lead Center: MSFC 
Participating Center(s): None

This subtopic will focus on technologies supporting innovative and advanced concepts for propellantless propulsion 
and other revolutionary transportation technologies. The technologies under Propellantless Propulsion include, but 
are not limited to: gravity assist and aerogravity assist; solar, laser, and microwave sailing; magnetospheric plasma 
propulsion; electrodynamic and momentum transfer tether propulsion; and aeroassist/aerocapture. Gravity assist 
propulsion methods utilize momentum exchange between the payload and a planet's heliocentric angular momentum 
through gravitational interaction. Solar or laser sailing exchanges momentum with photons through optical reflec-
tion. Magnetospheric plasma propulsion involves momentum exchange with solar wind ions through electrodynamic 
interaction. The electrodynamic tether propulsion method exchanges momentum with a planet's rotational angular 
momentum through electrodynamic interaction with the planetary magnetic field. The aeroassist/aerocapture propul-
sion method exchanges momentum with a planet's atmosphere through aerodynamic drag. Proposals should provide 
development of specific innovative technologies or techniques supporting any of these methods. A plan for demon-
strating feasibility, noting any test and experiment requirements, is also recommended. 


A7 Design and Analysis for Aerospace Vehicles  

The Aerospace Technology Enterprise is engaged in developing the tools, techniques, and technologies to revolu-
tionize the design and development processes of the aerospace industry with the goal to reduce the aerospace vehicle 
development cycle time. Aerospace vehicle systems design of the future will more fully integrate the various aero-
space disciplines and require a greater understanding of not only the critical physics of the various disciplines, but 
also how the physics of the various disciplines play together. Important elements in the next generation design and 
analyses of aerospace vehicle systems include: enhanced safety, affordability, productivity, and environmental 
compatibility. Innovative test instrumentation, and flow control and simulation are key areas in this effort. Flight 
sensors, sensor arrays, and airborne instruments for flight research are also sought. 

A7.01 Modeling and Control of Complex Flows Over Aerospace Vehicles and Propulsion Systems 
Lead Center: LaRC
Participating Center(s): ARC 

This subtopic solicits innovative ideas, concepts, and methodologies for the measurement, prediction, modeling and 
control of unsteady aerodynamic and aerothermodynamic phenomena that may be encountered by aerospace vehi-
cles. Biologically inspired approaches and/or ideas for flow control are also solicited in this subtopic. Also of 
interest are advanced measurement systems and ground testing techniques to provide dynamic and global measuring 
capabilities, higher bandwidth, and improved resolution. Additionally, the subtopic is interested in innovative com-
putational and experimental techniques that account for the complex aerothermodynamic, mixing, and combustion 
phenomena impacting the design and development of future space transportation vehicles, aero-assist orbital transfer 
vehicles, planetary entry probes, and hypersonic air-breathing propulsion systems. Unsteady phenomena of interest 
include active and passive flow control mechanisms; vortical and separated flows; equilibrium and finite-rate chem-
istry; thermodynamic and transport properties of multi-component mixtures, gaseous radiation, gas-surface 
interactions, mixing and combustion, shock-wave/boundary-layer interactions; and laminar, transitional, and turbu-
lent reacting and non-reacting flows. Specific areas of interest include: 

? Flow-physics modeling and control of transition and/or transitional flows, turbulence, and turbulence-related 
phenomena such as heat transfer, skin-friction, acoustics, mixing and combustion, with an emphasis on sepa-
rated flow and the scaling of ground-based experiments to flight Reynolds numbers. 
? Control and/or mitigation of separation, vortical flows, and shock wave phenomenon, including their impact on 
vehicle drag (turbulent skin friction drag, profile drag, drag-due-to-lift, and wave drag). 
? Non-conventional numerical methods for solving fluid-flow equations that increase computational efficiency, 
accuracy, speed, and utility, including construction of new algorithms, improved computer languages, efficient 
and adaptive grid-algorithm interfacing, and applications of automation techniques with discretization error as-
sessments. 
? Innovative techniques for robust and reliable handling and sharing of large CFD and experimental data sets. 
? Analytical and/or computational models/algorithms applicable to the optimization of integrated hypersonic 
propulsion/vehicle systems. 
? Innovative and patentable mixing techniques applicable to hypersonic propulsion, with special consideration 
placed on the stoichiometric fuel regimes. 
? Small-scale devices that initiate and sustain fuel (hydrogen and/or hydrocarbon) ignition and flame holding in 
supersonic combustor environments, at conditions relevant to hypersonic air-breathing propulsion flight trajec-
tories. 
? Advanced test techniques and flow diagnostics (including non-intrusive flow diagnostics and surface diagnos-
tics) for developing definitive databases across speed range from subsonic to hypersonic facilities including 
shock-expansion pulse facilities. 
? MEMS and nano technology sensors and interface electronics for flow measurements including flow velocity, 
pressure, temperature, shear stress, vibration, force, attitude, and/or acceleration. 
? A small onboard multichannel intelligent data system and/or a high-speed wireless (optical or radio frequency) 
data transfer system with 50 megabits-per-second or higher data rate for wind tunnel model applications. 
? Optical flow diagnostic technologies capable of resolving velocity, density, temperature, etc., in a global sense 
to provide planar or volumetric data, or at multiple points within the flow to provide temporally dependent cross 
correlations at sample rates on the order of 100 kHz. 






A7.02 Modeling and Simulation of Aerospace Vehicles in a Flight Test Environment 
Lead Center: DFRC 
Participating Center(s): None

Safer and more efficient design of advanced aerospace vehicles requires advancement in current predictive design 
tools. The goal of this subtopic is to develop more efficient software tools for predicting and understanding the 
response of an airframe under the simultaneous influence of aerodynamics and the control system, in addition to 
pilot commands. The benefit of this effort will ultimately be increased flight safety (particularly during flight tests), 
more efficient aerospace vehicles, and an increased understanding of the complex interactions between the vehicle 
subsystems. This subtopic solicits proposals for novel, multi-disciplinary, linear or nonlinear, dynamic systems 
simulation techniques. Proposals should address one or more of the objectives listed below: 

? Prediction of steady and unsteady pressure and thermal load distributions on the aerospace surfaces, or similar 
distributions due to propulsive forces, by employing accurate finite element CFD techniques. 
? Effective finite element numerical algorithms for multidisciplinary systems response analysis with adaptive 
three-dimensional grid/mesh generation at selected time steps. 
? Effective use of high-performance computing machines, including parallel processors, for integrated systems 
analysis or pilot-in-the-loop simulators. 
? Innovative applications of high-performance computer graphics or virtual reality systems for visualizing the 
computer model or results. 
? Correlation of predictive analyses with test data or model update schemes based on measured information. 

A7.03 Flight Sensors, Sensor Arrays and Airborne Instruments for Flight Research 
Lead Center: DFRC
Participating Center(s): GRC, LaRC 

Real-time measurement techniques are needed to acquire aerodynamic, structural and propulsion system perform-
ance characteristics in flight and to safely expand the flight envelope of aerospace vehicles. The scope of this 
subtopic is the development of sensors, sensor systems, sensor arrays or instrumentation systems for improving the 
state-of-the art in aircraft ground or flight testing. This includes the development of sensors to enhance aircraft 
safety by determining atmospheric conditions. The goals are to improve the effectiveness of flight testing by: simpli-
fying and minimizing sensor installation; measuring new parameters; improving the quality of measurements; 
minimizing the disturbance to the measured parameter from the sensor presence; deriving new information from 
conventional techniques; or combining sensor suites with embedded processing to add value to output information. 
This subtopic solicits proposals for improving airborne sensors and sensor-instrumentation systems in subsonic, 
supersonic and hypersonic flight regimes. These sensors and systems are required to have fast response, low volume, 
minimal intrusion and high accuracy and reliability, and include wireless technology. Innovative technologies are 
solicited in the following areas: 

Vehicle Environmental Monitoring 
? Nonintrusive air data parameters (airspeed, air temperature, ambient and stagnation pressures, Mach number, air 
density, flow angle, and humidity at air temperatures as low as -20 deg. F). 
? Off-surface flow field measurement and/or visualization (laminar, vortical, and separated flow, turbulence) 0 to 
50 meters from the aircraft. 
? Boundary layer flow field, surface pressure distribution, acoustics or skin friction measurements or visualiza-
tion. 
? Any of the above measurements in hypersonic flow. 

Vehicle Condition Monitoring 
? Optical arrays for robust flight control surface position and velocity measurement. 
? Sensor arrays for structural load monitoring. 
? Robust arrays for engine monitoring and control applications. 



Advanced Instrumentation for Aeropropulsion Flight Tests 
Thin film and fiber optic sensors, especially those compatible with advanced propulsion system materials such as 
ceramics and composites, and capable of withstanding the high temperatures and pressures associated with 
turbomachinery. 
? Onboard processing for data condensation, failed sensor identification or other valuable onboard processing 
capability. 

Vehicle Far Field Environmental Monitoring 
? Nonintrusive measurements at range of 2-5 kilometers of environmental data (natural and induced flowfields, 
turbulence, weather, traffic). 
? Onboard processing of sensed and telemetered data for integrated storage and strategic presentation to the flight 
crew. 

 
A8 Revolutionary Concepts in Aeronautics (RevCon) 

RevCon, or Revolutionary Concepts in Aeronautics, was conceived to provide NASA's Aerospace Technology 
Enterprise means to accelerate the exploration of high-risk, breakthrough technologies and enable revolutionary 
departures from traditional approaches to air vehicle design. The focus of the RevCon is to develop robust flight 
projects that are responsive to civil, commercial, and Department of Defense (DoD) needs. RevCon focuses solely 
on aeronautics vehicles and technology. The technology-driven RevCon research may consist of either government-
led or industry-led efforts to assure a broad coverage of technologies and applications. Flight research will be   
focused on technology demonstrations with short development times and must demonstrate high-payoff technolo-
gies that significantly advance the state-of-the-art. RevCon projects may include new research vehicles and/or 
advanced technology experiments on new or existing flight-test platforms. Innovative research partnerships with 
NASA, utilizing a range of contractual vehicles, are highly encouraged. The intent of soliciting these subtopic  
elements within the SBIR is to extend potential opportunities to small businesses by providing an incubator type 
access to future partnering in flight research projects.  The RevCon project is an established NASA endeavor which, 
for successful proposers, may allow opportunities beyond completion of the two-phase SBIR effort. More informa-
tion concerning RevCon is located at http://www.dfrc.nasa.gov/Projects/revcon/index.html 

A8.01 Revolutionary Aerospace Vehicle Systems Concepts 
Lead Center: LaRC
Participating Center(s): ARC 

The emphasis in this subtopic is on advanced aerospace vehicle concepts for both military and civil applications that 
accelerate the introduction of high risk, breakthrough technologies in order to enable revolutionary departures from 
traditional approaches to air vehicle design. These technologies must contribute to improving safety, performance, 
capacity, reduced emissions and/or noise, and development, production, or operations cost of future air vehicles. The 
scope includes advanced aerospace vehicle concepts and airframe systems such as wing, fuselage, propulsion/ air-
frame integration, and technologies applicable to these. Specific technical areas of interest include the following: 

? Advanced aerospace vehicle concepts and configurations of subsonic to supersonic air-breathing vehicles and 
unique propulsion/airframe integration concepts that offer revolutionary increases in performance over conven-
tional aircraft designs. 
? Innovative system-oriented research to support, develop, and/or enable advanced airframe technologies and 
concepts that could impact the design and optimization of any future class of aircraft. 
? Efficient, design-oriented application software embodying the mathematical and algorithmic aspects of both 
multidisciplinary design optimization (MDO) and systems analysis methods for aerospace vehicles. 
? Adaptation of newly emerging technologies, such as biomimetics and carbon nanotubes to aerospace vehicle 
concepts. 




A8.02 Revolutionary Technologies and Components for Propulsion Systems 
Lead Center: GRC 
Participating Center(s): None

NASA seeks highly innovative technologies for propulsion systems and components for advanced high speed aero-
space vehicles, to support missions, such as access to space, global cruise, and high-speed transports. The main 
emphasis in this subtopic is on high-risk, breakthrough technologies in order to revolutionize present-day gas turbine 
engines to operate over a flight spectrum of up to Mach 8. Specific technical areas include the following: 

? Advanced cooling concepts that minimize coolant penalties. This can include innovative cooling systems, mate-
rials, fuel cooling of combustor, and endothermic fuels and/or fuel additives to increase the heat-sink capacity 
or cooling capacity of fuels. 
? Innovative technologies relating to combustion process, including fuel injectors, piloting, flame holding tech-
niques for increased performance and decreased emissions, techniques to identify the onset of combustion 
instability in lean-burn and/or rich-burn, low NOx combustor, ramjet combustion and active and passive com-
bustion controls in order to extend the operability of the combustion components to a wider range of operating 
conditions. 
? New inlet designs to meet functional airflow needs of high Mach number propulsion. For instance, a variable 
geometry, supersonic, mixed compression inlet. Compatibility with turbomachinery and mode transition across 
the speed range should be addressed. Special attention should be given to combustor demands along a realistic 
flight corridor. This flight corridor must be compatible with turbine engine thermal-structure limits. 
? New techniques to improve the aerodynamic performance and operability of the inlet, including highly offset 
subsonic diffusers and designs for boundary layer control, minimizing engine unstart susceptibility, and tech-
niques to identify and control the onset of mode transition between different propulsion concepts within the 
same internal flowpath or dual flowpaths. 
? New controllable and reliable nozzle technologies with optimum expansion efficiency and thrust vectoring 
capability, including a computational nozzle design methodology to study various geometries and chemistry ef-
fects. 
? Enabling technologies of components and subsystems that allow turbomachinery to operate at high-speed flight 
conditions. Specific examples include (1) a lightweight, high pressure ratio compressor which must be protected 
or removed from the extremely high temperature primary air stream; (2) applications of advanced ceramic/ 
composite materials or micro-electrical-mechanical systems to enhance the performance and reduce the cost and 
weight; and (3) innovative inlet flow conditioning. 
? New designs for combined/combination cycles, in particular those including turbine propulsion. Alternate 
engine cycles that meet a unique mission requirement (e.g., global reach, access to space, etc.), including pulse 
detonation, ramjets, scramjets, and rockets. Proposals can also include development of unique components     
required for the maturation of alternate propulsion cycles, such as inlets, diffusers, nozzles, air-valves, fuel in-
jectors, combustors, etc. 

A8.03 Revolutionary Flight Concepts 
Lead Center: DFRC 
Participating Center(s): None

This subtopic solicits innovative flight test experiments that demonstrate breakthrough vehicle or system concepts, 
technologies, and operations in the real flight environment. The emphasis of this subtopic is the feasibility, devel-
opment, and maturation of advanced flight experiments that demonstrate advanced or revolutionary methodologies, 
technologies, and concepts. It seeks advanced flight techniques, operations, and experiments that promise significant 
leaps in vehicle performance, operation, safety, cost, and capability; and require a demonstration in the actual flight 
environment to fully characterize or validate. 

The scope of this subtopic is broad and includes advanced flight experiments that accelerate the understanding and 
development of advanced technologies and unconventional operational concepts. It is intended to advance and 
demonstrate revolutionary concepts and is not intended to support evolutionary steps required in normal product 
development. Proposals should emphasize the need of flight-testing a concept or technology as a necessary means of 
verifying or proving its worth. The benefit of this effort will ultimately be more efficient aerospace vehicles,     
increased flight safety (particularly during flight tests), and an increased understanding of the complex interactions 
between the vehicle or technology concept and the flight environment.













This page has intentionally been left blank.

 



8.1.2 BIOLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL RESEARCH

NASA’s Biological and Physical Research Enterprise conducts basic and applied research to support human explo-
ration of space and to take advantage of the space environment as a laboratory. It creates unique cross-disciplinary 
research programs, bringing the basic sciences of physics, biology, and chemistry together with a wide range of 
engineering disciplines. This Enterprise asks questions that are basic to our future: How can human existence ex-
pand beyond the home planet to achieve maximum benefits from space? How do fundamental laws of nature shape 
the evolution of life?

http://SpaceResearch.nasa.gov 

B1 CROSS-DISCIPLINARY PHYSICAL SCIENCES	50
B1.01 Exploiting Gravitational Effects for Combustion, Fluids, Synthesis, and Vibration Technology	50
B1.02 Gravitational Effects on Biotechnology and Materials Sciences	50
B1.03 Biomolecular Systems, Devices and Technologies	51
B2 FUNDAMENTAL SPACE BIOLOGY	54
B2.01 Understanding and Utilizing Gravitational Effects on Plants and Animals	54
B2.02 Biological Instrumentation	55
B2.03 Understanding and Utilizing Gravitational Effects on Molecular Biology and for Medical 
Applications	56
B3 BIOMEDICAL AND HUMAN SUPPORT RESEARCH	56
B3.01 Advanced Spacecraft Life Support	57
B3.02 Space Human Factors and Habitability	58
B3.03 Human Health Maintenance, Adaptation, and Countermeasures	59
B3.04 Spacecraft/Environmental Monitoring for Crew Health	60
B3.05 Maintaining Individual and Team Performance	60
B3.06 Space Medicine and Health Care Systems	62
B3.07 Food and Galley	64
B3.08 Biomedical Research and Development of Noninvasive, Unobtrusive Medical Devices for Future 
Flight Crews	65
B3.09 Radiation Shielding to Protect Humans	65
B3.10 Biomass Production for Planetary Missions	66
B4 RESEARCH INTEGRATION	67
B4.01 Telescience and Outreach for Space Exploration	67
B4.02 Space Commercialization	68


B1 Cross-Disciplinary Physical Sciences 

The Biological and Physical Research (BPR) Enterprise is taking advantage of the space environment which offers a 
unique laboratory to study biological, chemical and physical processes. Researchers will take advantage of this 
environment to conduct experiments in the biological and physical sciences that are impossible on Earth. BPR also 
seeks to engage the commercial sector in exploiting the economic benefits of the cross-disciplinary physical sci-
ences. In this topic, cross-disciplinary research and enabling technology is sought to understand the effects of 
gravity on the physical sciences as well as in the area of vibration isolation/measurement technology. This research 
and technology will provide the basic foundation to integrate our understanding of the role of gravity in the evolu-
tion, development and function of living organisms, and in biological and physical processes. BPR is also taking 
advantage of revolutionary advances in the biomolecular community by conducting basic research to develop 
breakthrough technologies which will result in prototype biomolecular micro- and nano-systems for the detection, 
imaging, recognition and monitoring of biological signatures and processes at the molecular level. 

B1.01 Exploiting Gravitational Effects for Combustion, Fluids, Synthesis, and Vibration Technology 
Lead Center: GRC 
Participating Center(s): None

The objective of this research is to deliver new technology in the form of devices, models, and/or instruments of use 
in microgravity and/or for commercial applications on Earth for:  

? Understanding the effects of microgravity on fluid behaviors. 
? Self-assembly of colloidal and biomolecular crystals in the fluid phase at nanoscale sizes. The results lay the 
foundation for understanding phase change, production of novel photonic materials, and fabrication of na-
noscale structures. 
? Utilizing the mechanics of granular materials to determine how the reduced gravity environment affects trans-
port and mixing of granular solids, with application to in-situ resources utilization (ISRU) and more efficient 
terrestrial processes. 
? Pool and flow boiling systems or subsystems that enable safe, efficient, and reliable heat transfer technologies 
for thermal control systems application in space.
? Multiphase flow and fluid management to provide designers key information on controlling the location and 
dynamics of liquid-vapor interfaces in microgravity. This is needed for safe and reliable fluid handling and 
transport in microgravity.
? Understanding the effects of microgravity on combustion behaviors. 
? Measuring the residual accelerations on spacecraft or in ground-based, low-gravity facilities. Emphasis is 
placed on MEMS or nanoscale devices. 
? Novel vibration isolation technology for use in ground-based, low-gravity facilities. 
? Improving in-space system performance that relies on fluid or combustion phenomena, principally spacecraft 
fire safety, especially fire and smoke prevention, detection, and suppression. 
? Pollution reduction and improvement of the efficiency of liquid-fueled combustors. 

B1.02 Gravitational Effects on Biotechnology and Materials Sciences 
Lead Center: MSFC
Participating Center(s): ARC 

NASA has interest in experiments that utilize the influence of microgravity on biotechnology processes and materi-
als science to understand physical, chemical, and biological processes. Areas of interest include protein crystal 
growth and structural analysis techniques, separation science and technology, biomaterials, polymeric materials, 
advanced electronic and photonic materials, as well as metals and alloys, and glass and ceramic materials technol-
ogy. Other areas of interest relate to microgravity processing approaches such as containerless processing and 
advanced thermal processing techniques. Methods for conducting science and technology research required to  
enable humans to safely and effectively live and work in space are needed. Innovation is sought in the following 
research areas and in their enabling technologies, including potential commercial applications on Earth: 

Biotechnology 
? Advancement of high throughput, automated preparation and/or analysis of biological crystals. This may   
include crystallization robotics, diffraction data collection, and the minimization of crystalline defects. 
? Technology designed to help improve our understanding of the effect of gravity on crystallization of biological 
macromolecules and crystal quality. 
? Research and development of technologies and techniques in the field of separations of biological material 
designed to help improve our understanding of the effect of gravity on separation efficiency. 
? Technologies to determine relationships between material substrates, tissue cell culture conditions, and subse-
quent cell culture development and expression. 
? High throughput technologies for the determination of gene expression. 
? Biotechnology and instrumentation to help enable safe human exploration beyond Earth orbit for extended 
periods. 

Materials Science 
? Novel technologies and materials for efficient radiation shielding during human exploration of space. The mate-
rials must be capable of attenuating galactic cosmic rays, solar particles, and secondary particles to acceptable 
limits. 
? Technology and instrumentation leading to high leverage (useful product to Earth-bound weight) materials 
processes for the utilization in situ of space resources, both materials and energy for application to the estab-
lishment of safe, self-sustaining, self-sufficient systems to enable science and a permanent human presence in 
space and on planetary surfaces. 
? Technologies and materials utilizing particles in the nanometer range size, having novel properties with appli-
cations to high strength, low-mass materials, advanced electronics, and radiation shielding. 
? Innovations in polymers, composites, and other materials that incorporate sensory, effector, and self-repair 
technologies. 
? Technologies imitating nature's ability to self-assemble (bio-mimetic processing). Of particular interest here are 
applications to functionally graded structures. 
? Development of materials for improved sensor technology, leading to the potential for miniaturization and high 
performance in hostile environments. 
? Development of advanced models for the simulation of both liquid and vapor transport that will lead to a better 
understanding of point defect incorporation into the solid state. 
? Advancement of the state-of-the-art for the levitation and containerless processing of molten liquid materials 
including the development of techniques for uniform heating and maintenance of uniform temperature; precise 
position control of levitated samples particularly in a gaseous environment; measurement and control as well as 
reduction or elimination of sample rotation in featureless samples; measurement of the emissivity of pure met-
als, alloys, oxides and ceramics; and measurement of the materials work function over a range of temperatures. 
? Microgravity furnace and experiment instrumentation technologies to better monitor sample health (tempera-
ture, pressure, etc.) and experiment status while minimizing the instrumentation's effect on the sample as well as 
reducing system impacts on experiment design; additionally, consideration should be given to extending the 
useful life of instrumentation in order to minimize the need for on-orbit recalibration and refurbishment/ 
replacement. 
? Microgravity furnace and experiment thermal technology such as improved insulation for minimizing power, 
volume, mass and complexity; improved high temperature thermal interface materials for transferring the heat 
into and out of the sample and furnace components (which are stationary or move relative to each other); heat-
ing and cooling approaches that enhance safety, science and resource utilization. 
? Advanced technologies for providing safe, efficient sample containment while enhancing scientific return and 
minimizing system impacts on furnace and experiment system design. 

B1.03 Biomolecular Systems, Devices and Technologies 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): ARC, MSFC 

In this subtopic, NASA recognizes that biomolecular approaches promise to enable lightweight, convenient, and 
highly focused therapies. Three key technologies form the cornerstones of NASA's Biomolecular Systems Program: 
nanotechnology, information technology, and biotechnology. Investment in these fast-moving fields will provide 
leading edge advances in health care that will benefit humans on Earth and in space. The program conducts basic 
research and develops breakthrough technologies to deliver prototype biomolecular micrometer and nanometer scale 
systems for the detection, imaging, recognition and monitoring of biological signatures and processes at the mo-
lecular level. This research program will support NASA's medical, diagnostic, and clinical objectives for long-
duration space flight, including commercial applications on Earth. 

Biomolecular Sensor and Effectors 
Emerging technology for micrometer and nanometer scale materials fabrication, manipulation, and characterization 
enables a new range of technological possibilities. Of particular interest are techniques for miniaturizing biochemi-
cal analysis instruments that can interact with life and its constituents at the molecular scale. One of the NASA goals 
is to seek out and identify biochemicals in minute concentrations in the human body and in extraterrestrial settings. 
Initially, these microscopic devices, engineered on the molecular scale, will function primarily to gather data about 
their environment, with the ultimate goal of actively responding to threats to astronaut health (e.g., by killing tumor 
cells or by targeted delivery of medication). 

Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) technology has enabled numerous innovative methods to miniaturize 
biomedical instruments. Microfluidic platforms are essential to the goals of detecting molecular signatures of real-
time biological activities in the human body. Finally, investigations of nanoscale materials, such as carbon nanotu-
bes, and their fabrication techniques are needed to develop biochemical devices with new capabilities with 
implications beyond miniaturization. 

Areas of Technology Development 
? In vivo sample acquisition and processing 
? In vivo device propulsion 
? Wireless communications for micro/nano biochemical instruments 
? Power sources (biochemical, electrochemical) 
? Self-assembled fabrication techniques for biochemical sensor arrays 
? Other technologies which would contribute toward integrated prototype nano-explorers (combining sample 
acquisition, processing, and sensing) 
? Integrated in vivo biochemical sensor and targeted drug delivery devices

Biomolecular Imaging 
Cellular structures and functions are a marvel in architecture, engineering, and programming. Currently there are 
various imaging techniques which allow us to obtain concentration variations, map compositions, and monitor 
transport and transduction mechanisms. Cellular biologists now use molecular imaging to localize and image which 
biological molecules are where inside a cell and its structures. In addition to where, we can also image when mole-
cules are produced to track temporal changes in cell metabolism. Current technologies for molecular imaging in 
cellular biology would include the following: FISH, GFP, MRI and spectral techniques that allow spectrally multi-
plexed probes. Atomic, chemical force microscopies, carbon nanotube and proximal probes are all examples of new 
approaches to resolving molecular structure at a small enough scale to image individual atoms. Photon based imag-
ing from infrared to x-ray, PET, MRI, NSOM, STM/AFM, photo-acoustic imaging, IR spectral imaging are just 
some examples of imaging techniques. Innovation is sought in the following: 

? New technologies for imaging protein expression in cells at or below the diffraction limited spatial resolution of 
optical microscopies 
? Nanoscale imaging at a resolution sufficient to provide protein or DNA sequence 
? Image cellular activities such as gene expression at a molecular scale 
? Nanoscale imaging at a resolution sufficient to provide protein or DNA spatial configuration 

Biosignatures 
Fundamental to the success of the NASA goals is the ability to identify biosignatures to distinguish life from non-
life on a planetary scale. Life is a thermodynamic enigma - seemingly violating thermodynamic laws by decreasing 
entropy. This ability comes from its ability to extract energy from the environment and use this energy to build 
structures and establish chemistries that are decidedly out of equilibrium. The combination of structural and chemi-
cal disequilibria, along with the resulting changes in the environment due to consumption and production of 
materials make the search for life rather straightforward - utilizing thermodynamics and kinetics. Search over a 
variety of scales for structures, measure the chemistry of these structures, and search for metabolites that are disap-
pearing or accumulating on a variety of time scales. Using such an approach, we imagine that life can be sought in a 
wide variety of environments, including the human body, simply by making simple measurements and asking the 
right questions of the data. NASA requires technology for in situ life detection that will provide a springboard for 
the use of similar approaches for detection of "unhealthy" subjects, be they unhealthy due to bacterial or viral infec-
tions, or malignancies. From this perspective, one can readily identify specific methods and approaches that will be 
used in astrobiology (things to be measured, statistical approaches, data handling and analyses, etc.), and how they 
might be adapted to laboratory, environmental, and in situ studies of life detection, and eventually to laboratory and 
clinical methods of diagnosis. 

Areas of Technology Development 
? Tools to assist in the identification of signatures of life via thermodynamic and kinetics of metabolism 
? Detection of molecular level structures and anomalies 
? Detection of chemical disequilibria and microscale chemical analyses 

Biomolecular Signal Amplification 
The ability to detect weak signals emitted from molecular interactions has always been a challenge for molecular 
biologists. Such signals highlight numerous important interactions such as antigen-antibody associations and nucleic 
acid hybridization reactions. These interactions are often used as assays to detect molecular indicators of disease 
pathology. As such, increasing sensitivity of these assays without compromising accuracy is of utmost importance. 
Traditionally, signal amplification in molecular biology has been achieved by one of two approaches- either amplifi-
cation of the molecule to be detected or intensifying the signal from the detector molecule. Reverse Transcriptase 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) is an example of the former. In RT-PCR, one makes a DNA copy of a low 
copy number transcript to be detected, then amplifies the number of molecules by PCR before detecting the prod-
ucts. To illustrate increasing the signal from a detection molecule, consider the use of labeled secondary antibodies 
to enhance signal from primary antibody binding. While these techniques have improved detection, methods are still 
limiting when it comes to detecting molecules in very small quantity or in single copy. More recent examples   
include catalyzed reporter deposition (CARD), branched DNA signal amplification assays and Fluorescent Reso-
nance Energy Transfer (FRET). 

Areas of Technology Development
? Single, specific molecule detection among high background noise 
? Contrast and sensitivity enhancers for non-invasive, real-time imaging 
? Utilization of biological amplification or self-amplification of target molecules 
? Amplification methods to enhance the probability of finding target molecules 
? Amplification of the precursors of ailments (fever, infections, bone loss, muscle atrophy, etc.) 
? Utilization of biological amplification or self-amplification for ailments 

Nano/Quantum Devices 
Nanostructure science and technology is a broad and interdisciplinary area of research and development activity that 
has been growing explosively in the past few years. It has the potential for revolutionizing the ways in which mate-
rials and devices are created and the range and nature of functionalities that can be accessed. Nanodevices or devices 
based on quantum effects have the potential for higher performance at lower volume, weight, and power consump-
tion. 

Areas of Technology Development
? Innovative synthesis and assembly techniques of nanostructured materials for device applications, including 
semiconductor nanostructures, metallic/magnetic nanostructures, and carbon nanotubes. 
? Innovative growth and formation techniques of semiconductor quantum dots with greater uniformity of size, 
controllable achievement of higher quantum dot density, and closer dot-to-dot interaction range. 
? Modeling, simulation and demonstration of innovative sensor concepts based on development of novel applica-
tions of nanotechnology and quantum mechanics. 
? Innovative nanoscale functional device building blocks based on single electron charging. Innovative nano-de-
vices for sensor applications. 
? Nanomagnetic devices 
? Molecular electronics 


B2 Fundamental Space Biology 

Fundamental Biology (FB) is NASA's agency-wide program for the study of fundamental biological processes 
through space flight and ground-based research. The program has three primary goals: (1) Effectively use the micro-
gravity and other unique characteristics of the space environment to enhance our understanding of fundamental 
biological processes (2) Develop the scientific and technological foundations for a safe, productive human presence 
in space for extended periods and in preparation for further exploration (3) Apply this knowledge and technology to 
improve our nation's competitiveness, education, and the quality of life on Earth. Increased emphasis is placed on 
cell and molecular biology and developmental biology, as well as on the growing disciplines of evolutionary biology 
and genomics. FB will participate in the expanded range of space missions the Agency will undertake in the future. 
These include the International Space Station, planetary probes, surface studies, sample returns, and planetary bases. 
The Biological and Physical Research Enterprise also seeks to engage the commercial sector in exploiting the eco-
nomic benefits of fundamental space biology on Earth. 

B2.01 Understanding and Utilizing Gravitational Effects on Plants and Animals 
Lead Center: ARC
Participating Center(s): KSC 

This subtopic area focuses on technologies that support the NASA Fundamental Biology Program in understanding 
the effects of gravity on plants and animals. The program supports investigations into the ways in which fundamen-
tal biological processes function in space, compared to their function on the ground. To conduct these investigations, 
the program supports both ground and space flight research. The improved understanding of the role of gravity on 
plants requires innovative support equipment for observing, measuring, and manipulating the responses of plants to 
environmental variables. Areas of innovative technology development include: 

? Measuring the atmospheric and radiation environment and optimizing the lighting and nutrient delivery systems 
for plants. 
? Innovative technologies for storage, transportation, maintenance, and in situ analyses of seeds and growing 
plants. 
? Sensors with low power requirements and low mass to monitor the atmosphere and water (nutrient) environ-
ment, as well as automated control and data logging systems for the experiment containers to measure 
performance indicators, such as respiration (whole plant, shoot, root), evapotranspiration, photosynthesis, and 
other variables in plants. 
? Data analysis and control. 
? Modular seeding and/or planting units to minimize labor. 
? Sensors for atmospheric, liquid and solid analyses, including atmospheric and liquid contaminants such as 
ethylene and other biogenic compounds as well as analyses of hydroponic and solid media for N, P, K, Cu, Mg 
and micronutrients. 
? Remote sensors to identify biological stress. 
? Expert control systems for environmental chambers. 

The improved understanding of the role of gravity on animals requires innovative instrumentation which tracks and 
analyzes from organism development, including gametogenesis through fertilization, embryonic development and 
maturation, through ecological system stability. Technologies may incorporate a variety of processes such as    
metabolism and metabolic control, through genetic expression and the control of development. Of particular interest 
are technologies that require minimal power and can non-invasively measure physical, chemical, metabolical and 
development parameters. Such measurements will ultimately be made in environments at one or more of several 
gravity ranges, e.g., "microgravity" (.01 to .000001 g), "planetary" gravity (1 g (Earth); 0.38 g (Mars) or 0.12 g 
(Moon)) or hypergravity (up to 2 g). But, refined and stable measurements are as important as gravity independence. 
Of interest are sustained instrument sensitivity, accuracy and stability, and reductions in the need for frequent meas-
urement standardization. Parameters requiring measurement include pH, temperature, pressure, ionic strength, gas 
concentration (O2, CO2, CO, NO2, etc.), and solute concentration (e.g., Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+, SO4 2-, Cl-, PO4  
3-, etc.). In the case of new techniques and instruments, a clear path toward miniaturization, reduction in power 
demands and increased space worthiness should be identified. Interests applicable to plant, microorganism, and 
animal study applications include: 

? Expert data management systems 
? Capabilities for specimen storage, manipulation and dissection 
? Video-image analysis for specimen (cell, animal, plant) health and maintenance 
? Sensors for primary environmental parameters and microbial organisms 
? Electro-physiology sensors, biotelemetry systems and biological monitors carried on spacecraft 

B2.02 Biological Instrumentation 
Lead Center: ARC 
Participating Center(s): None

The Fundamental Biology Program (FB) is the Agency lead for biological research and biological instrumenta-
tion/technology development, and focuses on research designed to develop our understanding of the role of gravity 
in the evolution, development, and function of biological processes. Increasingly the research thrusts are directed at 
incorporating the most advanced technologies from the fields of cell and molecular biology, genomics, and biotech-
nology, to provide researchers with the most-up-to-date methods to conduct their biological research. For these 
requirements, the capability to perform autonomous, in situ acquisition, preparation and analysis of samples to 
determine the presence and composition of biological components is a highly desired objective. As the size of flight 
payloads becomes increasingly smaller, and information technologies permit smarter and more independent payload 
and device control and management, the realization of completely autonomous in situ biological laboratories (ISBL) 
on spacecraft platforms and planetary surfaces will become more desirable. 

Biological and biomolecular/microbiological /genomic research is enabling unprecedented insight into the structure 
and function of cells, organisms, and sub-cellular components and elements, and a window into the inner workings 
and machinations of living things. Techniques and technologies, which have evolved from the microelectronics and 
biological revolutions, have permitted the emergence of a new class of instruments and devices. Many devices, 
techniques and products are now available or emerging which allow measurement, imaging, analysis and interpreta-
tion of the biological composition at the molecular level, and which permit determination of DNA/RNA and other 
analytes of interest. Advances in information systems and technologies, and bioinformatics, provide the capability to 
understand, simulate, and interpret the large amounts of complex data being made available from these biological-
physical hybrid systems. These synergistic relationships are facilitating the development of revolutionary technolo-
gies in many areas. 

Biological instrumentation technologies to support FB objectives are grouped into the following solicited categories: 

? Biological sample management and handling - Technologies for remote, automated biosample and biospecimen 
collection, handling, preservation/fixation, and processing. Modular, embeddable systems and subsystems      
capable of supporting a variety of tissue, liquid, and/or cellular specimens, from a wide range of biological 
subjects, including cells, nematodes, plants, fish, avians, mice, rats, and humans. 
? In situ measurement and control - Technology development for in sensors, signal processors, biotelemetry 
systems, sample management and handling systems, and other instruments and platforms for real-time moni-
toring and characterization of biological and physiological phenomena. 
? Genomics technologies - Technologies to enhance and augment research in genomics, proteomics, cell and 
molecular biology, including molecular and nano-technologies, cDNA arrays, gene array technologies, and cell 
culture and related habitat systems. 
? Bio-imaging systems - Advanced, real-time capabilities for visualization, imaging, and optical characterization 
of biological systems. Technologies include multi-dimensional fluorescent microscopy, spectroscopy systems, 
and multi- and hyperspectral imaging. 
? Biological information processing- Capability for automated acquisition, processing, analysis, communication, 
and archival and retrieval of biological data, and interface/transfer to advanced bioinformatics and biocomputa-
tion systems. 
? Integrated biological research systems and subsystems- Integrated, experiment/subject specific biolaboratory 
modules and systems, providing complete flight prototype capability to support the above five categories.

B2.03 Understanding and Utilizing Gravitational Effects on Molecular Biology and for Medical Applications 
Lead Center: JSC
Participating Center(s): ARC 

Microgravity allows unique studies of the effects of gravitational effects on cell and tissue development and behav-
ior. These studies utilize novel and advanced technologies to culture and nurture cells and tissues. Additionally, the 
ability to manipulate and/or exploit the form and function of living cells and tissues has significant potential to 
enhance the quality of life on Earth and in space through novel products and services, as well as through new   
science knowledge generated and communicated. This capability may lead to new products and services for medi-
cine and biology. Current space research includes new methods for purification of living cells; development of space 
bioreactors for culture of fragile cells that have applications in biomedical and cancer research; tissue engineering 
systems which take advantage of microgravity to grow 3-D tissue constructs; testing the effectiveness of drugs and 
biomodulators on growth and physiology of normal and transformed cells, and methods for measuring specific 
cellular and systemic immune functions of persons under physiological stress. Biotechnology research systems also 
are being developed for micro-g research on the International Space Station. 

Specific areas of interest for technology innovation are: 

? Techniques and technologies for culturing mammalian cells in bioreactors, including advanced bioreactor  
designs and support systems, miniature sensors for measurement of pH, oxygen, carbon-dioxide, glucose,     
metabolites, and microprocessor controllers. 
? Instrumentation for separation and purification of living cells, proteins and biomaterials, especially those using 
electrokinetic or magnetic fields that obviate thermal convection and sedimentation, enhance phase partitioning, 
or use laser light and other force fields to manipulate target cells or biomaterials. 
? Techniques or apparatus for macro-molecular assembly of biological membranes, bio-polymers, and molecular 
bio-processing systems; bio-compatible materials, devices, and sensors for implantable medical applications   
including molecular diagnostics, in vivo physiological monitoring and microprocessor control of prosthetic    
devices. 
? Methods and apparatus which allow microscopic imaging and biophysical measurements of cell functions, 
effects of electric or magnetic fields, photoactivation, and testing of drugs or biocompatible polymers on live 
tissues. 
? Quantitative applications of molecular biology, fluorescence image and flow cytometry, and new methods for 
measurement of cell metabolism, cytogenetics, immune cell functions, DNA, RNA, oglionuceotides, intracel-
lular proteins, secretory products, and cytokine or other cell surface receptors. 
? Micro-encapsulation of drugs, radiocontrast agents, crystals, and development of novel drug delivery systems 
wherein immiscible liquid interactions, electrostatic coating methods, and drug release kinetics from microcap-
sules or liposomes can be altered under microgravity to better understand and improve manufacturing processes 
on Earth. This includes production technologies for improving the controlled release from transdermal drug   
devices, ionaphoresis, controlled hyperthermia and new drug delivery systems for inhalation and intranasal ad-
ministration.  Also microencapsulation of cells for transplantation into patients.
? Miniature bioprocessing systems which allow for precise control of multiple environmental parameters such as 
low level fluid shear, thermal, pH, conductivity, external electromagnetic fields and narrow-band light for fluo-
rescence or photoactivation of biological systems. 
? Low-temperature sample storage (-80oC) and biological sample preservation instrumentation. 


B3 Biomedical and Human Support Research 

The goal of the Biological and Human Support Research topic is innovations to ensure the health, safety, and   
performance of humans living and working in space. This includes life support functions such as a healthy air and 
water supply, food for the crew in future ultra-long duration missions, health maintenance and in-space medical 
care, radiation shielding for protecting humans in deep space missions, and unique human factors issues of the space 
environment.  BPR seeks to engage the commercial sector in exploiting the economic benefits of biomedical and 
human support research on Earth.  Also sought, in terms of veterinary animal health, are life support functions for 
animals that may be on the mission for research or other purposes.
 
B3.01 Advanced Spacecraft Life Support 
Lead Center: JSC
Participating Center(s): ARC, JPL, KSC, MSFC 

Advanced life support systems are essential to enable human planetary exploration. Future life support systems must 
provide additional closure of life support systems to further reduce mass and to promote self-sufficiency. Require-
ments include safe operability in micro-and partial-gravity, high reliability, minimal use of expendables, ease of 
maintenance, and low system volume, mass, and power. Innovative, efficient, practical concepts are needed in all 
areas of regenerative processes providing the basic life-support functions of air revitalization, water reclamation, 
waste management, as well as sensors and controls. Also innovative, cost-effective flight experiment concepts are 
desired to understand the effect of microgravity and partial-gravity on the operation and performance of advanced 
life support technologies. In addition to these space exploration related applications, innovative regenerative life 
support approaches that could have terrestrial application are encouraged. Phase I proof of concept should lead to 
Phase II hardware development that could be integrated into a life support system test bed. Proposals should include 
estimates for power, volume, mass, crew time requirements, as well as an analysis of how the concept will impact 
other systems. Areas in which innovations are solicited include the following: 

Air Revitalization. Oxygen, carbon dioxide, water vapor, and trace gas contaminant concentration, separation, and 
control technologies. 

? Separation of carbon dioxide from a mixture primarily of nitrogen, oxygen, and water vapor to maintain carbon 
dioxide concentrations below 0.3 percent by volume. 
? Removal of trace contaminant gases from cabin air using advanced regenerable sorbent materials, improved 
oxidation techniques or other methods. 
? Alternate methods of storage and delivery of atmospheric gases to reduce mass and volume and improve safety 
compared to 4300 psia tank storage that has a wt penalty of 0.56 lbm of tank weight per lb of N2 stored. 
? Alternate methods of atmospheric humidity control that do not use liquid-to-air heat exchanger technology 
(dependent upon the spacecraft active thermal control system) or mechanical refrigeration technology. Design 
metabolic latent load is 2.277 kg of water vapor per person per day. 

Water Reclamation. Efficient, direct treatment of wastewater, consisting of urine, wash water, and condensates, to 
produce potable and hygiene water. 

? Technologies for the phase separation of solids, gases and liquids in a microgravity environment that are insen-
sitive to fouling mechanisms. 
? Technologies to improve the transport of wastewater fluids, particularly the elimination or management of 
solids precipitation in wastewater lines 
? Technologies for the treatment of brine solutions. 
? Post-treatment technologies to reduce the total organic carbon from 100 mg/l to less than 0.25 mg/l in the pres-
ence of 50 mg/l bicarbonate ions, 25 ppm ammonium ions and 25 ppm other inorganic ions. 
? Physicochemical technologies for primary treatment to reduce the total organic carbon concentration of the 
wastewater from 1000 mg/l to less than 50 mg/l and the total dissolved solids from 1000 mg/l to less than 100 
mg/l. 
? Technologies to minimize biofilm formation on fluid handling components, including flowmeters, checkvalves, 
regulators, etc. 
? Efficient techniques to minimize or attenuate the acoustic and micro-g vibration emissions from rotating equip-
ment. 

Waste Management. Present focus is on initial human mission scenarios beyond space station (i.e., limited plant 
production). Estimated waste generation rates for a 180-day transit and 600-day exploration mission (kg/day for a 6-
person crew) include the following: trash (0.56), food packaging (2.02 - 7.91), dry human fecal wastes (0.72), inedi-
ble plant biomass (1.69 - 5.45), paper (1.16), tape (0.25), and filters (0.33). 

? Long duration storage and containment for dry and wet trash, biodegradable and bio-hazardous materials. 
? Recovery of water from wet wastes including both human fecal waste and bio-hazardous wastes. 
? Stabilization and disinfection technologies to minimize hazards associated with wet wastes. 
? Compaction of wet and dry wastes. 
? Particle size reduction for preprocessing wastes to 100 microns or smaller. 
? Waste processing techniques such as aerobic and anaerobic biodigestion, wet oxidation, pyrolysis, supercritical 
oxidation, steam reforming, and incineration. 
? Product and by-product post-treatment technologies that eliminate (1) undesirable by-products such as nitric 
oxide and sulfur dioxide from a high temperature oxidative process (e.g., incineration), and (2) treatment of  
biological and physicochemical reactor residues (incinerator, composting process, etc.) for reuse and/or long du-
ration storage. 

Sensors. Significant improvements in miniaturization, accuracy, operational reliability, real-time multiple measure-
ment functions, in-line operation, self-calibration, reduction of expendables, and low energy consumption for 
monitoring and control of the life support processes. Sensitive, fast response, on-line analytical sensors to monitor 
suspended liquid droplets, dispersed gas bubbles and water quality, particularly total organic carbon. Other species 
of interest include dissolved gases and ions in water reclamation processes, and atmospheric gaseous constituents 
(oxygen, carbon dioxide, water vapor, and trace gas contaminants) in air revitalization processes. Both invasive and 
non-invasive techniques will be considered.

B3.02 Space Human Factors and Habitability 
Lead Center: JSC 
Participating Center(s): None

The goal of this subtopic is to develop innovative concepts to improve human-systems interactions and analysis of 
human-system interfaces, and to develop innovations in crew accommodations, equipment, and computer-based 
support. The long-term goal is to enable complex, future human space missions of up to 5 years without resupply, 
and with minimal ground support. 

This subtopic seeks technology innovations that will help address the following questions: 

? What habitability factors and working conditions are essential for crew well-being? 
? How can habitability factors and their effects on the crew be measured? 
? How can potential spacecraft environments and operational procedures be modeled to predict their effects on 
the crew? 
? How can human-system interfaces be designed and evaluated for effectiveness and usability in a cost-effective 
and reliable manner? 

Proposals are sought for innovations that improve human-systems interactions and analysis of human-system inter-
faces, and to develop innovations in crew accommodations, equipment, and computer-based support. Examples of 
specific needs are: 

? Automated analysis of video data for categorization and editing purposes. Using videotapes or live video, auto-
matically analyze images and categorize crew activities. Report start and stop times, durations, and frequencies 
of selected activities, such as translation, working at a fixed location, use of a specific tool or access to a certain 
panel. 
? Computer-based analysis of computer-user interfaces for complex display systems to provide a means to con-
duct objective (unbiased) review of the displays and to determine the noncompliance to guidelines and 
standards and consistency and commonality across different systems. The tool should have the capability to 
generate a report and to reference the specific guidelines or standards violated and recommend corrective       
actions. Two types of automated metrics can be used: 


- task-sensitive metrics (interfaces appropriate for user tasks) 
- layout-appropriateness (efficiency of the organization of the objects based on size, distance, and frequency of 
use)
? New technology for illumination modeling with particular attention to real-time displays of shadowing, glare 
and bloom combined with predicted energy distribution values to quantify surface illumination and reflection. 
New technology for illumination measurements and evaluations such as “smart” sensor technology for meas-
urement of illumination, color and surface reflectivity. 
? Crew and equipment restraint concepts: Develop design concepts and prototypes for multi-purpose crew or 
equipment restraining devices. These devices should provide easy set-up and disassembly (design goal < 5 min-
utes) with easy adjustments (no more than four points of adjustment). Restraints should be usable at any 
habitable location of space vehicle such as work sites, payload rack, crew quarters. They may have standard ISS 
attachment interfaces, or innovative methods of attachment. Adjustability for a wide range of sizes is required. 
Specifically, crew restraints must accommodate users from 5th percentile Japanese female (about 149 cm stat-
ure) to 95th percentile American male (about 190 cm stature). Equipment restraints should be able to hold items 
of various sizes and shapes in user selected positions and attitudes. 
? Biomechanics and anthropometry data collection and analysis: Develop size or motion measurement systems 
using wireless or clothing-mounted sensors or remote sensors. Systems should analyze input and produce 
biomechanical and anthropometry output accurate to +/-5 percent of dimension. Donning, adjustments, field 
calibration, and field maintenance time should insure ease, practicality, and acceptance by the user (design goal 
< 3 minutes). Examples of desired data outputs include reach limits, joint angles, work envelopes; positions, 
forces, torques, impulses exerted between equipment and user; characterization of gait or translation mechanics, 
and energy analyses. System should work in confined volumes, and, as a design goal, inside protective clothing 
such as extravehicular activity suits. 
? Human accommodations: Develop design concepts and prototype systems for laundry and dishwashing tasks. 
The systems should be suitable for operation in low-gravity and/or microgravity environments. Requirements 
include low water consumption and minimal trace gas emissions. 

B3.03 Human Health Maintenance, Adaptation, and Countermeasures 
Lead Center: JSC
Participating Center(s): ARC, JPL 

Human presence in space requires an understanding of the effects of microgravity and other components of the 
space environment on the physiological systems of the body and on the psychology of the crew. A variety of envi-
ronmental monitoring and biomedical activities to protect crew health and to counter the effects of space on human 
physiology is required. Countermeasures must be developed to oppose the deleterious changes that occur in space or 
upon return to Earth. Health care and medical intervention also must be provided over extended duration missions. 
As launch costs are extremely sensitive to mass and volume, sensors and instruments must be small and light with 
an emphasis on multi-functional aspects. Low power consumption is a major consideration, as are design enhance-
ments to improve the operation, design reliability, and maintainability of these instruments in microgravity. As the 
efficient utilization of time is extremely important, innovative instrumentation setup, ease of usage, improved astro-
naut (patient) comfort, non-invasive sensors, and easy-to-read information displays are all-important considerations. 

Major technology development disciplines include: endocrinology, immunology, hematology, microbiology, muscle 
physiology, pharmacology, drug delivery systems, and mechanistic changes in neurovestibular, cardiovascular, and 
pulmonary physiology. 

Human Health Monitoring and Countermeasures 
? Technologies to monitor physical activity and loads placed on different segments of the human body. 
? Approaches for sustaining, maximizing, assessing, and modeling individual as well as team performance. 
? Technologies for assessment of gas bubble formation or growth in the body after in-flight or ground-based 
decompression, and to prevent or minimize associated decompression sickness. 
? Approaches to achieve health care and intervention within the operational constraints of space flight, including 
pharmaceuticals having extended shelf-life, and non-invasive diagnostic methods and procedures, medical 
monitoring, dental care and surgery, and blood replacement technology. 
? In-flight procedures and techniques for assessing the human metabolism of proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, 
vitamins, and minerals. 
? In-flight analysis to evaluate physiological and metabolic and pharmacological responses of astronauts. 
? Development of virtual training tools to enhance adaptability of sensory-motor functions. 

Non-invasive Instrumentation 
? Instrumentation to be used for in-flight and ground-based studies for reliable and accurate non-invasive moni-
toring of human physiological functions such as the cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, neurological, 
gastrointestinal, pulmonary, immuno-hematological, and hematological systems. 
? Instruments to provide (1) quantitative data to establish the effectiveness of an exercise regimen in ground-
based research and (2) measure of bone strain in the hip, heel, and lumbar spine during exercise. 
? Smart sensors capable of sensor data processing and sensor reconfiguration. 
? Ultrasonic doppler systems for blood flow analysis. 
? Virtual medical instrumentation. 
? Automated biomedical analysis. 
? Analyzers for measurement of blood, urine, and respiratory gas volumes in microgravity. 
? Non-invasive, biosensors for real-time monitoring blood chemistry, gases, calcium ions, electrolytes, cellular 
components, proteins, lipids, and hormones. 
? Real time, in vitro, urine chemistry sensors for automated urine chemistry analysis in a smart toilet. 

B3.04 Spacecraft/Environmental Monitoring for Crew Health 
Lead Center: JSC
Participating Center(s): JPL 

Long-term human space missions require continuous environmental monitoring to protect crew health. Research 
disciplines include analytical chemistry, environmental microbiology, nutrition, radiation biology, and toxicology. 
Quantitative assessments require innovative, space flight-compatible approaches for environmental health monitor-
ing. Special instruments are needed to assess the overall acceptability of the environment for human habitation. In 
addition, instrumentation is needed for measuring thresholds for unacceptable atmospheric contamination levels and 
for assessing associated risks. Current specific areas of interest include: 

? Real-time and quantitative broad spectrum or target compound-specific analyzers for trace contaminants in 
spacecraft atmospheres. These instruments must be compact, feature low power consumption, low maintenance, 
a high level of automation (requiring minimal crew intervention) and operate with high stability. To be useful in 
the spacecraft environment, these devices must show specificity to compound identification and sensitivity to 
levels of contaminants well below exposure guidelines (SMAC's). Hydrogen cyanide, ammonia and formalde-
hyde are contaminants of high current interest.
? Maintenance of microbial quality of the atmosphere, water and surfaces during space flight and means of   
assessing their effectiveness, including new clinical microbiology methods for rapid identification of environ-
mental pathogens, methods for measuring bio-films and novel systems for sterilization. 

B3.05 Maintaining Individual and Team Performance 
Lead Center: JSC 
Participating Center(s): None

Human physical and cognitive performance capabilities vary over time. Short-term performance deterioration occurs 
due to fatigue and such phenomena as "vigilance decrements" but, given appropriate conditions (rest, diet, 
alternative activity), recovery is usually complete. Indeed optimal physical and cognitive loading usually leads to 
longer-term improvement - learning. "Forgetting" is also a common cause of performance failure and this can be 
reduced or compensated for by appropriate training, task design and job aids. Inappropriate conditions, such as those 
that may be found during long duration space flight under hostile environments and the ever-present stress of isola-
tion may give rise to greater and, perhaps permanent, degradation of performance capability. 

The challenge to the space human factors community is to create conditions that minimize the occurrence and  
effects of performance decrement. The first step in the management of individual and team performance is to moni-
tor available predictors of performance capability. The second step is to design environments, tasks, job aids and 
operational schedules that reduce long-term degradation. The third step is to intervene by introducing training  
opportunities that complement and supplement the routine demands. The fourth step is to evaluate the effectiveness 
of the first three steps so that future missions may benefit fully from the experience. These fundamental steps - 
monitoring, design, training and evaluation - may be supported by modeling and simulation so that factors that are 
likely to influence performance capability can be investigated under minimal risk conditions. 

This SBIR subtopic is aimed at the development of technology that will aid study, modeling and implementation of 
measures to preserve individual and team performance capability over extended space missions. The following 
categories and associated examples indicate some specific development projects that the NASA Space Human  
Factors community believes will help in the design of successful extended space missions. 

Monitoring 
Minimally invasive and unobtrusive devices and techniques that may be used to monitor the physiological and 
psychological states of individuals during long duration space flights or simulations.

Examples of such devices would include compact electrophysiological monitors that collect and analyze key    
parameters and indicate appropriate countermeasures - such as diet and exercise regimes. Psychological state moni-
tors would include EEG, sensory-motor performance, attention and other cognitive performance batteries with 
analysis and personal feedback. 

Minimally invasive and unobtrusive devices and techniques that may be used to monitor the behavior and perform-
ance of individuals and teams during long duration space flights or simulations. 

Examples of such devices would include semi automated human activity / behavior monitors, with embedded analy-
sis, diagnostic and prescription capabilities. Other useful devices would be system-based monitors of individual and 
team responses to varying system states. Such automated monitoring of individual and team behavior and perform-
ance and "psycho-social stability" could provide calibration and trend information regarding readiness to perform. 
These devices could also be applied to the measurement of productivity and task outcome quality. 

Design 
Information systems and interfaces that will aid users in their management of complex operations such as mainte-
nance and research. 

Just-in-time system and operation information systems tailored to aid the human user during the conduct of routine 
and emergency operations and activities. Examples would include effective and efficient job aids such as "intelli-
gent" manuals, checklists, warnings and instructions for the major subsystems (environmental control, docking, food 
processing, extravehicular activity etc.) 

Electronic devices, such as PDAs and web-based systems, that provide flexible interfaces between users and large 
information systems. 

Physical environments and equipment that are conducive to the conduct of individual and group operational, main-
tenance, exercise and research activities. 

Flexible habitat and multi-purpose, modular equipment designs that provide opportunities for variety and allow 
individuals and groups to work, carry out research, exercise, study, play and relax during long duration missions and 
simulations. Such habitat designs would also include opportunities to vary spatial, visual, acoustic and thermal 
environments. 

Trouble shooting, maintenance and repair aids and procedures that support crews in dealing with equipment and 
medical emergencies. 

Flexible operational schedule monitors that are aimed at detecting the likelihood of long-term performance capabil-
ity degradation. 

Monitored but flexible computer based physical, training, research, maintenance and recreational schedule monitors, 
for individuals and teams, aimed at maintaining high levels of physical and cognitive readiness. 

Training 
Physical training facilities and programs that are aimed at offsetting the stresses of long duration space flight. 

Innovative and flexible exercise equipment and associated regimes and certification processes that address musculo-
skeletal, cardiovascular and motor skill capabilities while maintaining high levels of performance feedback and 
motivation. 

Mission oriented training facilities, programs and schedules that are aimed at maintaining high levels of operational 
readiness. 

Baseline and just-in-time training and self-assessment simulation facilities and certification processes that assure 
competence (skills, knowledge) to deal with research, maintenance and operational demands such as construction, 
exploration and equipment and medical emergencies. 

Evaluation 
Development of equipment, methods and databases that may be used to formally evaluate the utility of intervention 
strategies aimed at the minimization of human performance degradation during long duration space explorations or 
simulations. 

"Lessons learned" and "voice of the customer" data capture and analysis facilities and processes that monitor indi-
vidual and crew actions, effects and self assessments of capability status. 

Modeling 
Development of physical analogs (simulators) that may be used to study the effects of long duration missions as 
well as to prepare individuals and teams for such missions. 

Innovative development and adaptation of facilities and situations that mimic the spatial, environmental (acoustic, 
visual, gravitational, pressure), task and operational characteristics of long duration space exploration missions that 
can be used both to investigate human behavior and performance and as training devices. 

Development of digital models of human environments, performance and behavior that may be used to simulate 
those factors that contribute to long-term performance capability maintenance or degradation. 

Computer simulations of individual and group behavior and performance that can be used to explore the conditions 
conducive to performance degradation. Such devices would include digital human models and simulations of opera-
tional environments and routine and emergency tasks. 

B3.06 Space Medicine and Health Care Systems 
Lead Center: JSC 
Participating Center(s): None

NASA seeks innovative proposals covering two small areas in Space Medicine and Health Care Systems for future 
space missions. These areas are: (1) wireless LAN technologies with software-configurable physiological monitor-
ing and (2) portable, collapsible, hyperbaric therapy. The mass and volume of medical equipment and consumables 
will be extremely constrained in future ultra-long duration missions, such as to the Moon or Mars. Power consump-
tion will also be a consideration, but of a lesser order. Health Care Systems must be operated in medical 
emergencies by astronauts, who may be non-medical professionals with limited medical training. In a Mars mission, 
for example, round trip radio communications delays of 6 to 40 minutes makes support from terrestrial physicians an 
impossibility for time-critical medical emergencies. 

Innovative Wireless LAN Technologies With Software-Configurable Physiological Monitoring: Except in 
infrequent, special medical flight experiments (which collect multiple physiological measurements over a short 
time) and during EVAs (where ECG is monitored), routine, continuous, medical monitoring of astronauts is cur-
rently not done in space. Limited crew time, as well as crew comfort requirements, make the daily application of 
sensors and electrodes with a multitude of wires very undesirable, so a few hours or days per month may be all that 
is available for routine monitoring or medical experiments. In nominal activities, the rigorous workload of astronauts 
requires that physiological monitoring equipment be extremely non-intrusive, yet rugged. In emergencies, crew 
comfort and patient movement also require a non-intrusive, rugged system. During medical emergencies, a continu-
ous stream of multi-channel physiological data from more than one injured astronaut may need to be collected and 
processed throughout the crisis.

In ultra-long duration missions to Mars or the Moon, physiological monitoring of astronauts may detect problems 
and suggest appropriate countermeasures, long before there is serious damage to crew health or greatly decreased 
crew performance. Additionally, a rapidly deployable, general purpose, individual physiological monitoring system 
would be a key component of an emergency medical system for serious injuries or illnesses, such as radiation sick-
ness, trauma, or severe injuries from fire or chemical burns, as well as in surgical monitoring. 

Whether in routine or emergency monitoring, an individual physiological data acquisition system would be wire-
lessly linked to computers and clinical laboratory equipment in the spacecraft equipment racks. Attending crew 
members would interface with computers in the spacecraft racks through RF-linked portable digital assistants 
(PDAs) to view wireless patient data, and to enter data into the medical record by hand. 

Enabling technologies for creating such a system are needed. All physiological input data should be simulated or 
modeled (no human subjects). Technology innovations are needed in the following areas: 

? A Wireless-LAN-based physiological data acquisition system that is adaptable to emergency response, as well 
as routine physiological monitoring, in human space exploration missions. Rapid software reconfiguration for 
different input signals should be based on digital processing rather than unwieldy hardware solutions. However, 
sophisticated data interpretation by intelligent systems will likely occur primarily in computers in spacecraft 
racks to conserve battery power in the wireless unit. The ability to operate in the noisy electromagnetic envi-
ronment of a spacecraft is important, and transmission distances should be at least 4 meters. 
? A software system that can process physiological data from several astronauts received across a wireless LAN, 
during both critical emergencies and more routine monitoring. Assume data from blood tests and other clinical 
laboratory equipment is available across the LAN. The software system would organize data from more than 
one astronaut at a time. It should extract physiologically important features in the data, compare current data to 
past medical records, and provide a clear visualization of the data to attendant crew members via a commer-
cially available, RF-linked PDA. 

Portable, Collapsible Hyperbaric Therapy for the Human Exploration of Space 
Extra-Vehicular Activity (EVA) suits, whether used on planetary surfaces or in the vacuum of space, are essentially 
one-person, independent spacecrafts. To preserve mobility and to allow them to be made of thinner and less stiff 
fabrics, EVA suits are operated at pressures much lower than 1 atmosphere (14.7 psi). EVA suits in the United 
States space program operate at slightly above 4 psi. During decompression, Nitrogen gas bubbles can form in body 
fluids, thereby damaging tissues and causing the symptoms of Decompression Sickness. To prepare for an EVA, 
crewmembers pre-breathe 100 percent oxygen to flush out as much Nitrogen from the body as possible. This lowers 
the risk of Decompression Sickness, which can be treated by use of a hyperbaric chamber, re-breathing 100 percent 
oxygen, and considerable medical judgment. 

Enabling technologies for creating a space-flight compatible system for hyperbaric therapy are needed. Mass and 
volume are severely limited in space exploration missions. Reasonable power consumption is also desired. All 
physiological input data should be simulated or modeled (no human subjects). Innovations are needed in the fol-
lowing areas: 

? A portable, collapsible/inflatable chamber to be pressurized and maintained at about 3 atmospheres during use, 
including a pressure controller and simple interfaces for physiological monitoring and oxygen re-breathing. 
Single crew or multi-crew chamber designs can be proposed. Crew comfort during use is also an important    
design goal. 
? A mask-delivered, oxygen re-breather system with carbon dioxide removal suitable for use in space flight  
Decompression Sickness therapy. Flow rates of at least 10 L/minute are needed. Proposal should include an 
oxygen concentrator for use in ambient air. Overall system mass, including consumables, is extremely impor-
tant. 
? A software system that can take physiological monitoring data and use it to allow a non-physician crewmember, 
with very limited medical training, to provide an individually tailored, hyperbaric therapy regimen. Available 
physiological signals may be assumed to include non-invasive oximetry for blood Oxygen saturation, ECG, res-
piratory rate, and Carbon Dioxide concentration in exhaled air. 

B3.07 Food and Galley 
Lead Center: JSC 
Participating Center(s): None

As NASA begins to look beyond low Earth orbit and to plan for future exploration missions, such as to the Moon or 
Mars, new technologies in food science and food processing will be needed.  The impossibility of regularly re-
supplying a Mars crew, for example, means that a complete diet for 6 crewmembers for more than 3 years will have 
to be carried with them.  Because of the mass of refrigeration equipment, freezing a large quantity of food may not 
be a practical solution.  As the crew remains on the lunar or planetary surface, crops will be grown to supplement the 
crew’s diet, especially within the context of experimental advanced life support systems that use plants to revitalize 
the air and water supply.  Hence, methods for processing potential food crops are needed.  Areas in which innova-
tions are solicited are: 

Ultra-long Duration, Shelf-Stable Food
An initial trip to Mars, for example, will require a stored food system that is nutritious, palatable and provides a 
sufficient variety of foods to support significant crew activities on a mission of at least 3 years duration.

Development of highly acceptable, shelf stable food items that use high quality ingredients is important to main-
taining a healthy diet.  Food items developed should be an important component of a healthy diet, low in sodium, 
and should contain less than 35% of calories from fat.  Shelf life potential in the 3 – 5 years range is needed.  Shelf 
life extension may be attained through new food preservation methods and/or packaging.

Advanced Packaging 
The current food packaging used on Shuttle and the International Space Station is not biodegradable or recyclable, 
and thus represents a significant trash management problem for exploration class missions. Waste packaging in 
Shuttle missions is returned to Earth for disposal and packaging waste for International Space Station is incinerated 
upon reentry into Earth’s atmosphere.  New packaging technology is needed to minimize waste from packaged food.  
An example might be a biodegradable package that can withstand the retort process or a plastic or other packaging 
material that can readily be recycled to make objects of value to the space flight mission.

Food Processing Equipment
Advanced life support systems, which use chemical, physical and biological processes, are being developed to 
support future human planetary exploration.  One such system might grow crops hydroponically and then process 
them into edible food ingredients or table ready products.  Equipment to process crops in space should be highly 
automated, highly reliable, safe, and should minimize crew time, power, water, mass, and volume.  Equipment for 
processing raw materials must be suitable for use in hypo-gravity (e.g., 3/8th-g on Mars) and in hermetically sealed 
habitats.  Some potential crops for advanced life support systems include wheat, soybeans, white potatoes, sweet 
potatoes, peanuts, and rice.   Examples of space flight compatible, food processing equipment include:

? Pressing the oil out of peanuts using an aqueous extraction method.
? Producing a nutritive sweetener source from high carbohydrate baseline crops (e.g., potatoes, sweet potatoes).
? Developing equipment that produces food products from rice, potatoes, soybeans, etc.
? A bread machine that has adjustable speeds and rising/baking times.
? Sanitizing salad crops through a highly automated process.





B3.08 Biomedical Research and Development of Noninvasive, Unobtrusive Medical Devices for Future Flight 
Crews 
Lead Center: GRC 
Participating Center(s): None

Human presence in space requires an understanding of the effects of the space environment on the physiological 
systems of the body. The objective of this subtopic is to sponsor fundamental and applied research leading to the 
development of noninvasive, unobtrusive medical devices that will mitigate crew health, safety, and performance 
risks during future flight missions. Medical diagnostic and monitoring devices are critical for providing health care 
and medical intervention during missions, particularly those of extended duration. Of particular interest are devices 
with minimized mass, volume, and power consumption, and capable of multiple functions. Design enhancements 
that improve the operation, design reliability, and maintainability of medical devices in the space environment are 
also sought. Of additional consideration are innovative instrumentation automation, ease of usage, improved astro-
naut (patient) comfort, and easy-to-read information displays. 

Major research disciplines include: endocrinology, immunology, hematology, microbiology, muscle physiology, 
pharmacology, drug delivery systems, and mechanistic changes in neurovestibular, cardiovascular, and pulmonary 
physiology. 

Innovations in the following areas are sought: 

? Biomedical monitoring, sensing, and analysis (including the acquisition, processing, communication, and dis-
play) of electrical, physical, or chemical aspects of a human's health or physiologic state. 
? Instrumentation to be used for in-flight and ground-based studies for reliable and accurate noninvasive moni-
toring of human physiological functions such as the cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, neurological, 
gastrointestinal, pulmonary, immunological, and hematological systems. 
? Noninvasive, biosensors for real-time monitoring of blood and urine chemistry including, gases, calcium ions, 
electrolytes, cellular components, proteins, lipids, and hormones. 
? In-flight specimen analysis to evaluate physiological, metabolic, and pharmacological responses of astronauts. 
? Instrumentation to maintain and assess levels of aerobic and anaerobic physical capability. 
? Instrumentation to monitor physical activity and loads placed on different segments of the human body. 
? Instrumentation to provide quantitative data to establish the effectiveness of an exercise regimen in ground-
based research, and to measure bone strain in the hip, heel, and lumbar spine during exercise. 
? Assessment of gas bubble formation or growth in the body after in-flight or ground-based decompression, and 
to prevent or minimize associated decompression sickness In-flight assessment of the metabolism of proteins, 
carbohydrates, lipids, vitamins, and minerals. 
? Smart sensors capable of sensor data processing and sensor reconfiguration. 
? Small, portable, medical imaging diagnostic instrumentation. 
? Virtual medical instrumentation. 

B3.09 Radiation Shielding to Protect Humans 
Lead Center: LaRC
Participating Center(s): JSC 

Revolutionary advances in radiation shielding technology are needed to protect humans from the hazards of space 
radiation during NASA missions. All space radiation environments in which humans may travel in the foreseeable 
future are considered, including low-Earth orbit, geosynchronous orbit, Moon, Mars, etc. All radiations are consid-
ered, including particulate radiation (electrons, protons, neutrons, alpha, light to heavy ions with particular emphasis 
on ions up to iron, mesons, etc.) and including electromagnetic radiation (ultraviolet, x-rays, gamma rays, etc.). 
Technologies of specific interest include but are not limited to the following: 

? Advanced computer codes are needed to model and predict the transport of radiation through materials. 
? Advanced computer codes are needed to model and predict the effects of radiation on the physiological per-
formance, health, and well being of humans in space radiation environments. 
? Innovative, lightweight radiation shielding materials are needed to shield humans in aerospace transportation 
vehicles, large space structures such as space stations, orbiters, landers, rovers, habitats, space suits, etc. The 
materials emphasis should be on non-parasitic radiation shielding materials, or multifunctional materials, where 
one of the functions is the radiation shielding function. 
? Non-materials and "out-of-the-box" radiation shielding technologies are also of interest.
? Laboratory and space flight data are needed to validate the accuracy of radiation transport codes.
? Laboratory and space flight data are needed to validate the radiation shielding effectiveness of radiation shield-
ing materials and non-materials solutions.
? Comprehensive radiation shielding databases and design tools are also sought to enable designers to incorporate 
and optimize radiation shielding into space systems during the initial design phases. 
? Accurate and reliable theoretical and phenomenological models are needed for the collision of radiation ions to 
generate the input databases for transport phenomena.  The models that give comprehensive results in a fast 
manner for broader (preferably whole) ranges of colliding ions, for ion energies from a few MeV to a few GeV, 
are desirable.  The information needed is as follows:  
- Total, elastic, absorption, and fragmentation cross sections; spectral and angular distributions of producing 
particles;
- Multiparticle fragmentations; 
- Cluster effects; and 
- Meson production.

B3.10 Biomass Production for Planetary Missions 
Lead Center: KSC
Participating Center(s): JSC 

The production of Biomass (in the form of edible food crops) in closed or nearly closed environments is essential for 
the future of long term planetary exploration and human settlement. These technologies will lead not only to food 
production but also to the reclamation of water, purification of air, and recovery of inedible plant resources. Areas in 
which innovations are solicited include the following: 

Crop Lighting 
? Sources for plant lighting such as, but not limited to, high-efficiency lamps or solar collectors 
? Transmission and distribution systems for plant lighting including, but not limited to, luminaires, light pipes and 
fiber optics 
? Heat removal techniques for the plant growth lighting such as, but not limited to, water-jackets, water barriers, 
and wavelength-specific filters and reflectors 

Water and nutrient delivery systems 
? Technologies for production of crops using hydroponics or solid substrates 
? Water and nutrient management systems 
? Regenerable media for seed germination plant support 
? Separation and recovery of usable minerals from wastewater and solid waste products for use as a source of 
mineral nutrients for plant growth 

Mechanization and Automation 
This system development includes innovations in propagation, seeding, and plant biomass processing. Plant biomass 
processing includes harvesting, separation of inedibles from edibles, cleaning and storage of edibles (seed, vegeta-
ble, and tubers) and removal of inedibles for resource recovery processing. 

Facility or System Sanitation 
This includes technologies to prevent excessive build-up of microorganisms within nutrient delivery systems. 

Health Measurement 
Remote, direct and indirect methods of measuring plant health and development using canopy (leaf) spectral signa-
tures or fluorescence to quantify parameters such as rate of photosynthesis, transpiration, respiration, and nutrient 
uptake. Data acquisition should be non-invasive or remotely sensed using spectral, spatial, and image analysis. 
System modeling and decision-making algorithms may be included. 

Sensor Technologies 
Innovations are required for development of sensors using miniature, subminiature and microtechnologies for 
evaluation of all phases of biomass production. Such sensor arrays include wide ranging applications of gas and 
liquid sensors as well as photo sensors and microbiological community indicators. Innovations are required in all 
phases of sensor development including biomass fouling, miniaturization, wireless transmission, multiple phase and 
multiple tasking sensors and interface with AI data collection systems. 

Flight Equipment Support 
Innovative hardware and components developed to support research in the Space Shuttle and onboard the Interna-
tional Space Station. Biomass production investigations using flight support equipment will be required to meet the 
demanding requirements for space flight operations, meet the rigorous scientific data collection standards, and  
produce plants in a controlled environment for research purposes and food. Innovations in whole package design and 
in component designs will be required. 


B4 Research Integration 

The BPR Enterprise seeks to use its research activities to encourage educational excellence and to improve scientific 
literacy from primary school through the university level and beyond. The Enterprise delivers value to the American 
people by facilitating access to the experience and excitement of space research. NASA seeks to engage the com-
mercial sector in exploiting the economic benefits of space. We also strive to involve society as a whole in the 
transformations that will be brought about by research in space. 

B4.01 Telescience and Outreach for Space Exploration 
Lead Center: MSFC
Participating Center(s): JSC 

NASA wants to provide to the general public, schools and industry, access to space and microgravity, and to infor-
mation about the commercial investigations and results. 

Telescience 
There are many potential users for NASA services and data located throughout the U.S. There are three general 
types of users for NASA activities. The first type is the principal investigator (PI) who is responsible for the space-
craft, experiment and attendant science and commands the payload or experiment. The second type is the secondary 
investigator(s) who participates in analysis of the science and its control but does not send commands. The third type 
is the educational user from graduate students to secondary school students. These users will receive either data 
processed by the PI or unprocessed data. Commercial investigations require the ability to receive, process and dis-
play telemetry, view video from science sources, including the ISS, and talk to NASA about the science and 
operations. To conduct or be involved in general science activities, including the ISS science operations, a user will 
require various services from the Payload Operations Integration Center (POIC) located in Huntsville, Alabama, or 
other control centers located at various NASA facilities. These services are required to enable the experiment to be 
controlled using the inputs from various video sources, telemetry and the crew. Inputs allow the experimenter to 
send to their spacecraft or experiment commands to change various experiment operations. Before an experiment 
can get underway, an experimenter must participate in the payload planning process to schedule on-board services 
like electricity, crew time and cryogenics. This planning process is integral to the entire payload operation and 
requires the PI or his representatives to participate via voice or video teleconferencing. To enable users to operate 
from their home base, whether it is located at a laboratory, office or home, these services (commensurate to the level 
of their operation) must be provided at their location at a reasonable cost. Costs include both the platform upon 
which these services will run and the communications required to provide these services to the experimenter's loca-
tion. 

Outreach and Education 
Another user is the general public observer who is interested in the science that is being conducted. Proposals are 
sought which provide a system or systems based on commercial solutions. These systems should allow outreach 
participation in NASA commercial programs, including the science and operational levels. The public should re-
ceive data, including voice, video and processed data, but generally would not be allowed to interact with the current 
investigations. Systems could provide for the general public access to NASA and commercial science activities and 
operations through low-cost technologies, and outreach and education activities. The systems should be capable of 
facilitating secondary and college-level students' access to and the ability to participate in science activities. 

Similarly, the systems should be able to accommodate institutions and organizations which promote the use of 
science and technologies, e.g., museums and space camps. 

B4.02 Space Commercialization 
Lead Center: MSFC 
Participating Center(s): None

In accordance with the Space Act, as amended, to "seek and encourage to the maximum extent possible the fullest 
commercial use of space," NASA facilitates the use of space and microgravity for commercial products and serv-
ices. The products may utilize information from in-space activities to enhance an Earth-based effort, or may require 
in-space manufacturing. This subtopic’s goal is the development of infrastructure equipment for commercial    
experimentation and operations in space, or the transfer of these technologies to industry in space or on Earth. 
Automated processes and hardware (robotics) which will reduce crew time are a priority. All Agency activity in 
microgravity, including those in life science and microgravity sciences, which lead to commercial products and 
services, are of interest. Some specific areas for which proposals are sought include: 

Biotechnology and Agribusiness 
Biotechnology, biomedical and agricultural instrumentation or techniques that exploit space-derived capabilities or 
data to support the commercial development of space by the agricultural, medical or pharmaceutical industry. This 
includes, in particular: 

? Portable Biological Sensors -The need for sensing devices that can detect and identify biological pathogens 
(airborne or in vivo) is desired to support NASA's mission for a permanent presence of man in space. 
? Development of Noninvasive Health Monitoring Systems/models - Application to NASA's crew health program 
for extended duration missions. For example, (1) novel in vitro cell-matrix models for studying the effects of 
microgravity on human tissue repair and wound healing, (2) novel organotypic skin models which simulate 
physiological changes found in humans under a microgravity environment, (3) functional models for delineating 
the MG-inducible or MG-responsive pathways of human tissue angiogenesis (new blood vessel formation). 
? Physiological measurement in microgravity of bone growth and the immune system in microgravity. 
? Technology for innovative research in plant-derived pharmaceuticals using microgravity. 
? Instrumentation for agricultural research, i.e., genetic manipulation of plants using microgravity. 
? Instrumentation or technology to explore the use of microgravity in genetic assay, analysis, and manipulation. 
? Instrumentation to analyze cell reactor systems and characterize cell structure in microgravity in order to de-
velop enhanced drug therapies that can also be applied to pharmaceutical development and commercialization. 
? Innovative techniques for dynamic control and cryogenic preservation of protein crystals. 
? Instrumentation for preparation of protein crystals for x-ray diffraction experiments without the use of frangible 
materials. 
? Low temperature control chambers requiring little or no power for bringing temperature sensitive experiments 
up to or back from the International Space Station. 

Microgravity Payloads 
? Design/develop microgravity payloads for space station applications that lead to commercial products or serv-
ices. 
? Enabling commercial technologies that promote the human exploration and development of space. 
? Enabling commercial technologies through the use of ISS as a commercial test bed for hardware, products, or 
processes. 
? Enabling technology designed to reduce crew workloads and/or facilitate commercial investigations or proc-
essing through automation, robotics, or nanotechnology. 

Combustion Science 
Innovative applications in combustion research that will lead to commercial products or improved processes through 
the unique properties of space or through enhanced or innovative techniques on the ground. 

Food Technology 
Innovative applications of space research in food technology that will lead to developing commercial food products 
or improved food processes through the unique properties of space or through enhanced or innovative techniques on 
the ground. 

Biomedical Materials 
Innovative unique structure materials where microgravity promotes structures such as biodegradable polymers for 
use in wound healing and orthopedic applications. 

Entertainment Value Missions 
Technology for innovative approaches for commercial economic benefit from space research involving broadcast-
ing, e-business or other activities that have entertainment value.













This page has intentionally been left blank.


 


8.1.3 EARTH SCIENCE

NASA's Earth Science Enterprise uses satellites and other tools to intensively study the Earth in an effort to expand 
our understanding of how natural processes affect us, and how we might be affecting them. Such studies will yield 
improved weather forecasts, tools for managing agriculture and forests, information for fishermen and local 
planners, and, eventually, the ability to predict how the climate will change in the future. Earth Science has three 
main components: a series of Earth-observing satellites, an advanced data system, and teams of scientists who will 
study the data. Key areas of study include clouds; water and energy cycles; oceans; the chemistry of the atmosphere; 
land surface; water and ecosystem processes; glaciers and polar ice sheets; and the solid Earth. Working together 
with the nations of the world, Earth Science seeks to improve our knowledge of the Earth and to use that knowledge 
to the benefit of all humanity.

http://earth.nasa.gov


E1 INSTRUMENTS FOR EARTH SCIENCE MEASUREMENTS	72
E1.01 Passive Optical	72
E1.02 Active Optical	73
E1.03 In Situ Terrestrial Sensors	75
E1.04 Passive Microwave	76
E1.05 Active Microwave	77
E1.06 Passive Infrared - Sub Millimeter	79
E1.07 Thermal Control for Instruments	80
E2 PLATFORM TECHNOLOGIES FOR EARTH SCIENCE	80
E2.01 Structures and Materials	81
E2.02 Guidance, Navigation and Control	81
E2.03 Command and Data Handling	82
E2.04 Advanced Communication Technologies for Near-Earth Missions	83
E2.05 On-Board Propulsion	84
E2.06 Distributed Spacecraft Systems	85
E2.07 Storage and Energy Conversion and Power Management and Distribution	86
E2.08 Life-Cycle Integration, Validation, and Distributed Collaboration Technologies	87
E3 ADVANCED INFORMATION SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY	88
E3.01 Knowledge Discovery and Data Fusion	88
E3.02 Automation and Planning	89
E3.03 High Performance Computing and Networking	89
E3.04 Geospatial Data Analysis Processing and Visualization Technologies	90
E3.05 Data Management and Visualization	90
E4 APPLYING EARTH SCIENCE MEASUREMENTS	91
E4.01 Special Event Imaging and Other Earth Observing Instruments	91
E4.02 Advanced Instrument Technology for Transitional Boundaries of Land and Water	92
E4.03 Innovative Tools and Techniques Supporting Earth Science Measurements	93
E4.04 Advanced Educational Processes and Tools	94

E1 Instruments for Earth Science Measurements 

NASA's Earth Science Enterprise is studying how our global environment is changing. Using the unique perspective 
available from space and airborne platforms, NASA is observing, documenting, and assessing large-scale environ-
mental processes, with emphasis on biology and biogeochemistry of ecosystems and the global carbon cycle, global 
water and energy cycle, climate variability and prediction, atmospheric chemistry, and solid Earth and natural haz-
ards. A major objective of the ESE instrument development programs is to implement science measurement 
capabilities with small or more affordable spacecraft so that the development programs can meet multiple mission 
needs and therefore make the best use of limited resources. The rapid development of small, low cost remote sensing 
and in situ instruments is essential to achieving this objective. Consequently, the objective of the Instruments for 
Earth Science Measurements SBIR topic is to develop and demonstrate instrument component and subsystem tech-
nologies which reduce the risk, cost, size, and development time of Earth observing instruments, and enable new 
Earth observation measurements. The following subtopics are concomitant with this objective and are organized by 
measurement technique. 

E1.01 Passive Optical 
Lead Center: LaRC
Participating Center(s): ARC, GSFC

Proposals are sought for the development of innovative technology for measuring the atmosphere and Earth surface 
using passive optical techniques. The innovations are intended to increase our understanding of the interacting 
physical, chemical and biological processes that form the complex Earth system. 

Atmospheric measurements of interest include climate and meteorological parameters, such as temperature, amounts 
of aerosols, clouds, water vapor, carbon dioxide and methane; and, chemical constituents such as ozone, nitrogen 
dioxide, nitric oxide, carbon monoxide, and hydrocarbons. Surface measurements of interest include vegetation 
index, multi-spectral imaging, bi-directional reflectance, biological productivity, surface terrain mapping, tempera-
tures of water, land and ice, ocean productivity and ocean color. Technology innovations may include components, 
subsystems, and complete systems and should address reduced size, weight or power, improved reliability and lower 
cost. The wavelengths of interest include IR, visible and ultraviolet bands. The innovations should expand the capa-
bilities of airborne systems (manned and unmanned) and the next generation spaceborne systems. Innovative 
approaches are an important element of competitive proposals under this solicitation. Specific needs include: 

System Architectures 
? Innovative instrument architectures that provide flexibility in system configuration to address specific meas-
urement requirements. For example, sampling flexibility in either the spectral or spatial domain of an imaging 
spectrometer focal plane array will provide the ability to trade between spectral and spatial resolution in the 
context of a specific scientific problem as constrained by limited downlink bandwidth. 
? Innovative instrument architectures that expand scientific knowledge and provide significant reductions in the 
end-to-end implementation. This includes designs and component technologies relating to improved sensors for 
observations Earth's surface and atmosphere. Examples of instruments include multi-spectral imaging radiome-
ters and flux radiometers for wavelengths from the UV to microwave. Innovative measurement concepts or 
advances leading to smaller and lower cost instruments will be considered. Technical approaches should include 
application of un-cooled infrared detectors, non-mechanical choppers, calibration methods and tuned filters. 
? High throughput compact systems (f/1-f/2). 
? Wide field of view spectrometer systems (e.g., with expandable architectures) with no moving parts. 
? Systems with inherent environmental stability. 

Component Technologies 
? Optical technologies that will enable high spatial resolution (< 10 meter) measurements along track for space-
craft sensors in low Earth orbit. Combinations of high light collection efficiency and instrument throughput, and 
fast, low noise detector readout are required to provide adequate signal power (SNR > 500) to address multi- 
and hyper-spectral measurement requirements. 
? Wedge filters suitable for space application and capable of spectral resolutions of a few nano-meters over the 
visible through short-wave IR portions of the spectrum, and angular (IFOV) resolutions on the order of a milli-
radian. 
? 4 K x 4 K and larger detector arrays sensitive in near UV (300-400 nm) and Near IR (1-3 micron) with large    
(> 1 million electrons) well depth. 
? Ultra-stable spectral calibration techniques for data quality management and the evaluation of long-term sensor 
degradation trends in space instruments. 
? On-board, near real-time processing for atmospheric correction, geo-location, and geometric correction of 
digital image data. 
? Optical imager technologies that will enable lightweight, low cost large aperture optical systems optics for a 
variety of land, ocean, and atmospheric observations through the elimination of conventional telescopes and   
focal planes in space based imagers. For example, phased arrays or multi-spectral imagers based on holographic 
and/or diffractive optics. Instruments should have performance specifications comparable to or better than cur-
rent imagers such as MODIS aboard NASA's Terra satellite. 
? Fast, 1-meter diameter lightweight telescope for space application with minimal distortion in the 0.3- 3-micron 
wavelength range. 
? Ultra-stable remote sensor calibration techniques for long-term trend determination in space instruments. 
? Development of innovative techniques and component technologies for measuring polarization of light scattered 
from the atmosphere. 
? Advanced gratings on flat or curved surfaces that maximize efficiency and minimize scatter and ghosts. 
? Linear variable filters with extended range, seamlessly stitched filter strips. 
? Broadband antireflection methods that can be applied to the photodetector array, in the visible and infrared. 
? Novel or improved high-resolution dispersive elements. 
? Environmentally robust, electronically variable filters with extended spectral range. 

Innovative Optomechanical Designs 
? Development of systems capable of off-nadir pointing for the acquisition of multi-angle data, the acquisition of 
stereo pairs, the frequent imaging of rapidly changing events from orbit scanning and tilting to remove sun     
reflection off the ocean, and the frequent imaging of rapidly changing events from orbit. Very low mass, power 
and high speed and flexibility are desired. 
? Compact, lightweight optical designs that utilize a minimum number of optical surfaces. 
? Non-classical designs utilizing guided wave optics. 
? Self-aligning systems or methods of assembly. 

E1.02 Active Optical 
Lead Center: LaRC
Participating Center(s): JPL, GSFC 

Innovative developments are needed in lidar technology for the remote measurement of atmospheric aerosols, 
clouds, molecular species (ozone, water vapor, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide), 
meteorological parameters (density, pressure, temperature, and wind profiles), planetary surface topography, vege-
tation, and sub-surface ocean layers; for ground-based lidar systems and laser ranging systems that measure 
atmospheric backscatter, vegetation structure and composition, and pulse time-of-flight to laser transponders or 
reflectors on satellites. Specifically, technologies for expanding the measurement capabilities of current airborne 
lidar systems and for the next generation of spaceborne and Unmanned Aeronautical Vehicle (UAV) lidar systems 
are sought. Technology innovations may include lidar components, subsystems, and complete systems and may 
address reduced weight or power or increased energy efficiency, reliability, or autonomous operation. 

Atmospheric Constituent Measurements 
? Solid-state laser technology for tunable and/or fixed frequency, high-energy (> 500 mJ at more than 10 Hz) 
pulsed lasers for spaceborne applications. This includes solid-state laser materials compatible with diode 
pumping and high efficiency (> 2.5 percent wallplug) and new or improved optical materials for high efficiency 
frequency conversion. Of prime interest are long-lifetime, low weight and volume materials and technologies 
applicable to highly efficient, conductively cooled lasers operating in the 0.28-0.36, 0.47-0.54, 0.7-1.1, and   
1.5-2.8 micron regions; also interested in the 3.2-4.7 micron region. Also needed are single-mode, line-
narrowed, compact sources for injection seeding in the 0.28-0.36, 0.7-1.1 and 1.5-2.1 micron regions and high 
reliability, high efficiency, high brightness, conductively cooled diode arrays operating in wavelength regions 
for pumping solid-state lasers. 
? Lidar receiver technology for large (> 3m^2), lightweight collection apertures having multiple-wavelength 
operation from UV to near IR is needed. Inherent spectral selection/dispersion and high peak transmission    
(50-80 percent), electromagnetically tuned, narrow bandwidth (10-100 pico-meters) filtering is desirable. Small- 
and large-angle scanning (up to 3 degrees and 30-60 degrees off nadir, respectively) of 0.5 meter and 1.0 meter 
lidar systems is needed for space. Low mass and few to no moving parts. 
? Signal detection and processing subsystems with quick recovery (less than 3 microseconds) from saturation and 
high-speed, high-quantum efficiency (30-80 percent) detectors with low-noise and good linearity are needed for 
lidar operation over large dynamic ranges. 
? For UAV applications, compact, high repetition rate, narrow line-width laser transmitter systems are needed 
that produce energies from micro- to milli-Joules per pulse. Laser energies of more than 100 mJ at 30-1000 Hz 
in the UV and more than 200 mJ at 10-20 Hz in the 355, 936, 944, and 1064 nm region are needed. 
? High CW power (> 500 mW-1 W) single spatial mode laser diodes, based on simplistic structures such as the 
Fabry-Perot cavity, for core-pumping of fiber lasers. Wavelength regions mainly include 800-810 nm, but also 
of interest are 780-785 nm, and 980 nm. 
? Single-element and array detectors, combined with preamplifier circuitry in a single integrated circuit, for lidar 
detection at 355nm, 532nm, and 1064nm having several giga-hertz bandwidth, high quantum efficiencies, good 
linearity, and minimum cooling requirements. 
? Optical phased array scanning concepts for programmable beam pointing with high transmission (> 90 percent) 
and angular deflection capability > 20 degrees. Aperture diameters from 2 cm to 1 m are of interest and preser-
vation of beam quality is a primary requirement. 
? Large aperture, ultra light, scanning lidar receivers with high efficiency, narrow field-of-view, and narrowband 
filtering. 
? Scanning lidar transceivers that use aperture sharing and are capable of producing multiple look angles, each 
with a small field-of-view. 

Coherent Wind Measurements in the 1.5-2.5 Micrometer Wavelength Range 
? Low mass, compact optics for deflecting a circularly polarized laser beam for a conical scan. Diameters of 5 cm 
to 1 m with an immediate need of up to 50 cm. Preservation of laser beam quality is required. 
? Low mass, 1-m class beam expanding telescope technology with low fabrication cost and long-lived perform-
ance in space environment. 
? Technology for autonomous operation and alignment maintenance of coherent lidar systems; such as a low-
mass, low-power, low-voltage optical element capable of correcting piston, defocus, astigmatism, coma, and 
spherical aberrations. 
? Integrated opto-electronic receiver combining photodetectors, local oscillator laser, beam conditioning and 
combining, and signal processing components. 
? Fast (few tens of microseconds) lag-angle compensation optics technology for precise, reliable steering of the 
optical axis of a space-based Doppler lidar. 
? Single-element and array detectors having high bandwidth, high quantum efficiencies in the 1.5-2.5 micron 
wavelength band. Bandwidths up to 6 GHz are desired. 
? Pulsed, eye safe laser technology having technical path leading to simultaneous characteristics of  > 2J energy,  
> 12 Hz PRF, < 500 W laser power requirement when pulsing, < 2 microsecond duration, < 1 m/s equivalent 
pulse spectrum,      < 1.3 M^2 beam quality, intermittent operation with periods of 1-10 minutes and duty cycle 
around 20 percent and minimum "off" power draw and minimum time to restabilize, and which shows potential 
for 7-year lifetime in space environment. 
? Diode-laser arrays operating near 0.79 micrometers having pulse lengths > 1.0 ms, energy densities > 1.3 
J/cm^2, duty cycle > 0.20 and narrow beam divergence. 
? High efficiency methods for concentrating the emissions from nominal 1.0 cm square arrays to 4.0 mm diameter 
spot sizes. 
? Tunable single-mode semiconductor lasers or other compact, single frequency sources for use as injection 
seeders and/or local oscillators, with linewidths 0.1-0.2 MHz operating in the 1.8-2.2 micron and 3.0-3.5 micron 
regions. 

Surface Topography and Oceanic Measurements 
? Compact, conductively-cooled, near-infrared laser transmitters with less than 1 nsec pulses, single spatial mode, 
several milli-joule performance at multi-kilohertz pulse rates. 
? Oceanic LIDAR systems or components in the 480-685 nm wavelength region for remote sensing of sub-
surface ocean layers and fluorescence. 
? Quadrant Geiger-mode avalanche, photo diodes or comparable micro-channel plate photomultipliers with a 
quantum efficiency approaching 40 percent @ 532 nm, less than or equal to 400 psec risetime, and submicro-
second gating at 2 kHz rates. 
? Silicon avalanche photo diodes, photodiode arrays, and photon counting detectors with quantum efficiency 
greater than 35 percent at 1064 nm wavelength; and high efficiency, high speed, and low noise detectors for the 
1500 to 2200 nm wavelength region. 
? Signal detection and processing subsystems with quick recovery (less than 30 micro-sec) from saturation and 
high-speed, high-quantum efficiency (30-80 percent) detectors with low noise and good linearity are needed for 
lidar operation over large dynamic ranges. 

Direct Detection and Other Measurements 
? Laser techniques and component technology for measurement of the wind field and wind shear using direct-
detection methods, with high accuracy and high range resolution. Eye safety is a consideration. 
? High spectral resolution filters with high throughput, out of band spectral blocking, frequency tunable, and 
frequency stabilization for direct-detection measurements of winds at 355 nm (1 GHz bandwidth) and 1064 nm 
(100 MHz bandwidth). 
? Compact, power efficient, frequency reference with better than 1 part in 10^14 stability and accuracy; that is 
suitable for interplanetary missions. 
? Adaptive photon-counting correlation range receivers capable of extracting satellite range data with high time 
resolution (better than 20 psec) during daylight operations. 
? High detectivity, spectrally diverse receivers including narrowband notch filters, high transmission narrow 
bandpass optical filters, and multi-channel array detection. 

E1.03 In Situ Terrestrial Sensors 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): ARC, JPL 

Proposals are sought for the development of in situ measurement systems that will enhance the scientific and com-
mercial utility of data products from the Earth Science Enterprise program and that will enable the development of 
new products of interest to commercial and governmental entities around the world. Technologies of interest    
include: 

? Autonomous GPS-located ocean platforms to measure and transmit to remote terminals upper ocean and lower 
atmosphere properties including temperature, salinity, momentum, light, precipitation, and biology. Similar  
sensor packages for use onboard ships while under way. 
? Autonomous low-cost systems to measure surface and lower atmospheric parameters including soil moisture, 
precipitation, temperature, wind speed and humidity. 
? Small, lightweight instruments suitable for balloons, kites, or small remotely piloted aircraft for in situ meas-
urements of atmospheric trace gasses and cloud radioactive properties including extinction, absorption, 
scattering phase function and phase function asymmetry. 
? Wide-band microwave radiometers capable of high-speed characterization of cloud parameters, including liquid 
and ice phase precipitation, that can operate in harsh environmental conditions (e.g., on-board ships and air-
craft). 
? Autonomous GPS-located airborne sensors that remotely sense atmospheric wind profiles in the troposphere 
and lower stratosphere with high spatial resolution and accuracy. 
? Systems and devices for measurement of atmospheric aerosol chemical, microphysical, and radioactive proper-
ties. Autonomy is desired for ground-station network applications and deployment aboard aircraft. 
? Lightning location techniques to locate VLF sferic sources (5 to 15 kHz) within 100 km at ranges of 2000 km or 
more. 
? Systems for in situ measurement of atmospheric electrical parameters including electric and magnetic fields, 
conductivity, and optical emissions. 
? Systems to measure line- and area-averaged rain rate at the surface over lines of at least 100 meters and areas of 
at least 100x100 meters. 
? Lightweight, low-power systems that integrate the functions of inertial navigation systems and GPS receivers 
for characterizing the flight path of remotely piloted vehicles. 
? Low-cost, stable (< 1 percent over several months) portable radiometric sources for field characterization of 
spectral radiometers. 
? Innovative approaches for the gathering, storing, and forwarding of in situ measurements using common carrier 
infrastructures. 
? Mass spectrometer time-of-flight system with: (1) weight < 1kg, (2) dynamic range > 1E8, (3) a mass range of  
1 - 2000 amu with unit resolution throughout, and (4) innovative ionization techniques with an order of magni-
tude improvement over current sources. 

E1.04 Passive Microwave 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): JPL 

Proposals are sought for the development of innovative passive microwave technology in support of Earth System 
Science measurements of the Earth's atmosphere and surface. These microwave radiometry technology innovations 
are intended for use in the microwave frequency band from, principally about 1 to 300 GHz, but also with applica-
tions outside that band. The key science goal is to increase our understanding of the interacting physical, chemical 
and biological processes that form the complex Earth system. Atmospheric measurements of interest include climate 
and meteorological parameters, including temperature, water vapor, clouds, precipitation, aerosols; air pollution; and 
chemical constituents such as ozone, NOX, and carbon monoxide. Earth surface measurements of interest include 
water, land and ice surface temperatures, land surface moisture, snow coverage and water content, sea surface salin-
ity and winds, and multi-spectral imaging. 

Technology innovations are sought that will provide the concepts, components, subsystems, or complete systems to 
improve Earth System Science measurements. Technology innovations should address enhanced measurement 
capabilities such as improved spatial or temporal resolution,  spectral resolution, or calibration accuracy. Technol-
ogy innovations should provide reduced size, weight, power, improved reliability and lower cost. The innovations 
should expand the capabilities of airborne systems (manned and unmanned) as well as next generation spaceborne 
systems. Highly innovative approaches that open new pathways are an important element of competitive proposals 
under this solicitation. Specific technology needs include: 

? Imaging radiometers, receivers or receiver arrays on a chip, and flux radiometers for microwave wavelengths  
(1 - 500 GHz). 
? Large aperture, deployable antenna systems suitable for highly reliable space deployment with RMS surface 
accuracy of ~ 1/50th wavelength. Such large apertures can be real or synthetic apertures. Of key importance is 
the ability for a highly compact launch configuration, followed by a highly reliable erection and resultant sur-
face configuration. Novel approaches to beam steering for these very large aperture antenna systems are also 
desired. 
? Onboard data processing capabilities that enable real-time, re-configurable computational approaches that en-
hance research flexibility. Such approaches should improve image reconstruction, enable high compression 
ratios; improve atmospheric corrections and the geo-location and geometric correction of digital image data. 
? Techniques for the detection and removal of Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) in microwave radiometers are 
desired. Microwave radiometer measurements can be contaminated by RFI that is within or near the reception 
band of the radiometer. Electronic design approaches and subsystems are desired that can be incorporated into 
microwave radiometers to detect and suppress RFI, thus insuring higher data quality. 
? New technology calibration reference sources for microwave radiometers that provide greatly improved refer-
ence measurement accuracy. High emissivity (near block-body) surfaces are often used as on-board calibration 
targets for many microwave radiometers. NASA seeks ways to significantly reduce the weight of aluminum 
core target designs, while reliably improving the uniformity and knowledge of the calibration target tempera-
ture. NASA seeks innovative new designs for highly stable noise-diode or other electronic devices as additional 
reference sources for on-board calibration. Of particular interest are variable correlated noise sources for cali-
brating correlation-type receivers used in aperture synthesis and polarimetric radiometers. 
? New approaches, concepts and techniques are sought for microwave radiometer system calibration over or 
within the 1 -300 GHz frequency band, that provide end-to-end calibration to better than 0.1°K, including cor-
rections for temperature changes and other potential sources of instrumental measurement drift and error. 
? Focal plane array modules for large-aperture passive microwave imaging applications. 
? High power (> 5 mW) signal sources and low noise (< 500 K) heterodyne receivers for operation above 100 
GHz. 
? Multi-GHz. Low power, 4-bit under-sampling analog-to-digital converters and associated digital signal proc-
essing logic circuits. 
? Low power lightweight microwave radiometers are desired that are able to operate stably over long periods, 
with DC power consumption of less than 2 W and preferably less than 1 W, not including any mechanisms. 
? MMIC LNA for spaceborne microwave radiometers, covering the frequency range of 165 to 193 GHz, having a 
noise figure of 6.0 dB or better (and with low 1/f noise). 
? NASA is developing satellite systems that will use passive and active microwave sensing at L-band and other 
frequencies to measure sea surface salinity, and soil moisture to a depth of ~ 10 cm. In support of these global 
research efforts, the following ancillary measurement systems are required: 
- Inexpensive approaches to ground sensors are desired that are capable of measuring areas at least 100,000 
km2, with spatial resolution of 20 km. These ground sensors will be needed to validate those space-borne 
measurements. Measurement of ground-wave propagation characteristics of radio signals from commercial 
sources may satisfy that need. Although absolute values of soil moisture are desirable, they are not required if 
the technique can be calibrated frequently at suitable sites. Cost per covered area, autonomous operation,    
anticipated accuracy and depth resolution of the soil moisture measurement will be considerations for selec-
tion. 
- Autonomous GPS-located ocean platforms are needed that can measure upper ocean and lower atmosphere 
properties including temperature, salinity, momentum, light, precipitation, and biology, and can communicate 
the resultant data and computational or configuration instructions to and from remote terminals. Similar sen-
sor packages are desired for use onboard ships while under way. This includes the development of intelligent 
platforms that can change measurement strategy upon receipt of a message from a command center. 
- Autonomous low-cost systems are desired that can measure Earth and ocean surface and lower atmospheric 
parameters including soil moisture, precipitation, temperature, wind speed, sea surface salinity, surface irradi-
ance and humidity. 

E1.05 Active Microwave 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): GSFC 

Active microwave sensors have proven to be ideal instruments for many Earth science applications. Some examples 
include global freeze/thaw monitoring and soil moisture mapping, accurate global wind retrieval and snow inunda-
tion mapping, global 3-D mapping of rainfall and cloud systems, precise topographic mapping and natural hazard 
monitoring, global ocean topographic mapping and glacial ice mapping for climate change studies. For global  
coverage and the long-term study of Earth's eco-systems, space-based radar is of particular interest to Earth scien-
tists. Radar instruments for Earth science measurements include Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), scatterometer, 
sounder, altimeter and atmospheric radar. The life-cycle cost of such radar missions has always been driven by the 
resources - power, mass, size, and data rate - required by the radar instrument, often making radar not cost competi-
tive with other remote sensing instruments. Order-of-magnitude advancement in key sensor components will make 
the radar instrument more power efficient, much lighter in weight and smaller in stow volume, leading to substantial 
savings in overall mission life-cycle cost by requiring smaller and less expensive spacecraft buses and launch vehi-
cles. On-board processing techniques will reduce data rates sufficiently to enable global coverage. High 
performance yet affordable radars will provide data products of better quality and deliver them to the users in a more 
timely and frequent manner with benefits for science, as well as civil and defense communities. Technologies which 
may lead to advances in instrument design, architectures, hardware, and algorithms are the focused areas of this 
subtopic. In order to increase the radar remote sensing user community, this subtopic will also consider radar data 
applications and post processing techniques. 

The frequency and bandwidth of the operation are mission driven and defined by the science objectives. For SAR 
applications, the frequencies of interest include L-band (1.25 GHz), C-band (5.30 GHz), and X-band (9.6 GHz). The 
required bandwidth varies from 20 MHz to 300 MHz to achieve the desired resolution. The application of the syn-
thetic aperture technique is also applied to other radars, including radar ice sounding and wide swath ocean 
altimeters. The sounder is a low frequency radar (< 100 MHz) with a very high percentage bandwidth (100 percent). 
The atmospheric radars operate at very high frequencies (35 GHz and 94 GHz) with only modest bandwidth     
requirements on the order of a few MHz. Ocean altimeters typically operate at L-band (1.2 GHz), C-band (5.3 GHz) 
and Ku-band (12 GHz). 

The emphasis of this subtopic is on core technologies that will significantly reduce mission costs and increase per-
formance and utility of future radar systems. Specific areas in which advances are needed include: 

Synthetic Aperture Radar 
? Lightweight, electronically steerable, dual-polarized, phased-array antennas 
? Very large aperture antennas (50 m x 50 m) for geosynchronous SAR applications 
? Shared aperture, multi-frequency antennas 
? Lightweight deployable antenna structures and deployment mechanisms 
? High-efficiency, high power, low-cost, lightweight, phase-stable transmit/receive modules 
? Advanced transmit/receive module architectures such as optically fed T/R modules, signal up/down conversion 
within the module and novel RF and DC signal distribution techniques 
? Advanced radar system architectures including flexible, broadband signal generation and direct digital conver-
sion radar systems 
? Advanced antenna array architectures including scalable, reconfigurable and autonomous antennas; sparse 
arrays; digital beamforming techniques; time domain techniques; phase correction techniques 
? Innovative radar system concepts to achieve wide swath (> 250 km) to enable frequent site revisit and ultra-
low-cost radars to enable constellations for global coverage 
? Advanced radar component technologies including high-power low-loss RF switches, filters and phase shifters 
(MEMS devices are of particular interest); thin-film membrane compatible electronics, high-efficiency power 
converters; high-speed analog-to-digital converters; low-sidelobe chirp waveform generators and optical chirp 
generators 
? Distributed digital beamforming and on-board processing technologies 
? SAR data processing algorithms and data reduction techniques 
? SAR data applications and post-processing techniques 

Radar Ice-Sounder 
? Synthetic aperture processing technique to increase resolution 
? Lightweight broad-band (100 percent or more) low frequency (< 100 MHz), high gain (> 10 dB) deployable 
antennas 
? Highly efficient, broadband, low frequency (< 100 MHz) transmitter 
? Low-power, highly integrated radar components 
? Data processing algorithms and data reduction techniques 
? Hardware and/or software development for the ionospheric correction in space-borne radar sounders 
? Data applications and post-processing techniques 

Atmospheric Radar 
? Low sidelobe, electronically steerable millimeter wave phased-array antennas and feed networks 
? Low sidelobe, multi-frequency, multi-beam, shared aperture millimeter wave antennas 
? Large (~300 wavelength), lightweight, low sidelobe, millimeter wave antenna reflectors and reflectarrays 
? Lightweight deployable antenna structures and deployment mechanisms 
? High power Ka-band and W-band transmitters (10 Kwatt) 
? High-efficiency, low-cost, lightweight Ka-band and W-band transmit/receive modules 
? Advanced transmit/receive module concepts such as optically fed T/R modules 
? On-board (real-time) pulse compression and image processing hardware and/or software 
? Advanced data processing techniques for real-time rain cell tracking, and rapid 3-D rain mapping 
Polarimetric Ocean/Land Scatterometer 
? Shared aperture, multi-frequency antennas 
? Large, lightweight, electronically steerable reflectarrays 
? Dual-polarized antennas with high polarization isolation 
? Lightweight deployable antenna structures and deployment mechanisms 
? High efficiency, high power, phase stable L-band, C-band and Ku-band transmitters 
? Low-power, highly integrated radar components 
? Calibration techniques, data processing algorithms and data reduction techniques 
? Data applications and post-processing techniques 

Wide Swath Ocean and Surface Water Monitoring Altimeters 
? Shared aperture, multi-frequency antennas 
? Large, lightweight antenna reflectors and reflectarrays 
? Lightweight deployable antenna structures and deployment mechanisms 
? High efficiency, high power, phase stable C-band and Ku-band transmitters 
? Real-time on-board radar data processing 
? Calibration techniques, data processing algorithms and data reduction techniques 
? Data applications and post-processing techniques 

Geosynchronous Ocean Altimeter 
? Core radar technologies and signal processing definition 

E1.06 Passive Infrared - Sub Millimeter 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): LaRC

Many NASA future Earth science remote sensing programs and missions require microwave- to submillimeter 
wavelength antennas, transmitters, and receivers operating in the 3-cm to 100-micron wavelength range (or a fre-
quency range of 10 GHz to 3 THz). General requirements for these instruments include large-aperture (possibly 
deployable) antenna systems with rms surface accuracy of < 1/50th wavelength (or better); the ability to scan or 
image many beamwidths on the sky (array receivers); small low-power MMIC radiometers, and high-throughput, 
low power, backend correlators and spectrometers. The focus is on technology for passive radiometer systems that 
are more spectrally flexible, lighter, smaller, and use less power. These systems must be of durable design for use on 
aircraft platforms and at remote/autonomous observatory sites; they must also be suitable for space applications with 
lifetimes of 5 years or more. Earth remote sensing receivers typically operate at LN2 (or higher) temperatures and 
require moderate noise performance. Advances in cooler technology will enable use of technology presently used in 
astrophysics receivers, which are cooled to a few Kelvin for better sensitivity, requiring near quantum-noise-limited 
performance. For these systems, advancement is needed in primarily three areas: (1) the development of frequency-
stabilized, broadband, tunable, fundamental local oscillator sources covering frequencies between 160 GHz and 3 
THz; (2) the development of submillimeter-wave mixers in the 300-3000 GHz spectral region with improved sensi-
tivity, stability, and IF bandwidth capability; and (3) the development of higher-frequency and higher-output-power 
MMIC circuits. Specific innovations are required in the following areas: 

? Heterodyne system integration at the circuit and/or chip level is needed to extend monolithic microwave inte-
grated circuit (MMIC) capability into the submillimeter regime. MMIC amplifier development for both power 
amplifiers and low noise amplifiers at frequencies up to several hundred GHz is solicited. Integration of a local 
oscillator multiplier chain, mixer, and intermediate frequency amplifier is one example. There is also a specific 
need to demonstrate radiometer systems using phased-arrays and MMIC radiometers from 60 GHz to approxi-
mately 400 GHz. 
? Solid-state, phase-lockable local-oscillator sources with flight-qualifiable design approaches are needed with    
> 10 mW output power at 200 GHz and > 100 micro-watts at 1 THz; line widths should be < 100 kHz. Since 
heterodyne mixers are relatively broadband, a major limitation of existing local oscillator sources is a narrow 
tuning range, which requires many devices for the broad spectral coverage. For example, a single local-
oscillator source that could tune from 1-2 THz with flat output power in excess of 10 micro-watts would find 
immediate use. These local oscillator sources should be compact and have direct current power requirements    
< 20 W. 
? Stable local-oscillator sources are needed for heterodyne receiver system laboratory testing and development. 
? Multi-channel spectrometers that analyze intermediate frequency signal bandwidths as large as 10 GHz with a 
frequency resolution of < 1 MHz that are small and lightweight and that use low direct current power (< 5 mW 
per channel) with high stability. 
? Compact and reliable millimeter and submillimeter instrumentation that produces high sensitivity images si-
multaneously in multiple spectral bands. 
? Schottky mixers with high sensitivity at T = 100K and above. 
? Superconducting HEB mixers and SIS mixers. 
? Receivers utilizing planar diodes or alternative reliable technologies in the 300-3000 GHz spectrum. 
? Lightweight and compact radiometer calibration references covering 100-800 GHz frequency range. 
? Lightweight, field portable, compact radiometer calibration references covering frequencies up to 200 GHz. The 
reference must be temperature stable to within 1 Kelvin with a minimum of 3 temperature settings between 250 
and 350 Kelvin. 
? Low cost, special purpose, ground based receivers to detect signals radiated from active satellites that are in 
orbit for estimating rain rate, water vapor, and cloud liquid water. 
? Large diameter (up to 25-m) deployable antennas suitable for Earth remote sensing at frequencies up to 30 GHz.
? Calibrated radiometer systems that can achieve accuracy and stability of 0.1K. 

E1.07 Thermal Control for Instruments 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): None

Future instruments for NASA's Earth Science Enterprises will require increasingly sophisticated thermal control 
technology. Optical alignment and sensor needs are requiring ever tighter temperature control, heat flux levels from 
lasers and other similar devices are increasing, and cryogenic applications are becoming more common. Some appli-
cations may require significantly increased power levels while others may require extremely low heat loss for 
extended periods. The advent of very small instruments may also drive the need for new technologies, particularly 
since such small instruments will have low thermal capacitance. In general, high performance, versatility, low cost, 
smaller mass and volume (down to the MEMS level), and high reliability are the prime technology drivers. Further-
more, the drive towards 'off-the-shelf' commercial spacecraft buses presents engineering and technological 
challenges for instruments. Innovative proposals for instrument thermal control systems are sought in the following 
areas:

? Miniaturized (down to the MEMS level), cryogenic (3K - 80K) heat transport devices, especially those suitable 
for cooling sensors and very small electronics.
? Advanced, multi-evaporator, two-phase heat transport devices to isothermalize very large structures such as 
antennas and telescopes.
? Highly reliable, miniaturized Loop Heat Pipes and Capillary Pumped Loops which allow multiple heat load 
sources and multiple sinks.
? Advanced thermoelectric coolers capable of providing 100s of milliwatts of cooling at 150 K and below.
? Hybrid cooling systems that make optimal use of radiative coolers.
? Advanced analytical techniques for thermal modeling, focusing on techniques that can be easily integrated with 
emerging mechanical and optical analytical tools.


E2 Platform Technologies for Earth Science 

NASA is fostering innovations that support implementation of the Earth Science (ES) program, an integrated inter-
national enterprise to study the Earth system. ES uses the unique perspective available from orbit to study land cover 
and land use changes, short and long term climate variability, natural hazards, and environmental changes. Addi-
tionally, ES uses terrestrial and airborne measurements to complement those acquired from Earth orbit. ES has a 
parallel development effort to these platforms which include the largest ground and data system ever undertaken 
which will provide the facility for command and control of flight segments and for data processing, distribution, 
storage, and archival of vast amounts of ES research data. The ES Program defines Platforms as the host systems for 
ES Instruments. That is, they provide the infrastructure for an instrument or suite of instruments. Traditionally, the 
term 'platform' would be synonymous with 'spacecraft,' and it certainly does include spacecraft. However, 'platform' 
is intended to be much broader in application than spacecraft and is intended to include nontraditional hosts for 
sensors and instruments such as airborne platforms (piloted and unpiloted aircraft, balloons, drop sondes), terrestrial 
platforms, sea surface and subsurface platforms, and even surface penetrators. These application examples are given 
to illustrate the wide diversity of possibilities for acquiring ES data consistent with the future vision of the ES Pro-
gram and indicate types of platforms for which technology development is required. 

E2.01 Structures and Materials 
Lead Center: LaRC
Participating Center(s): ARC, GSFC, JPL, JSC 

Advanced materials and structures technologies are needed for future ES platforms. These include materials and 
multifunctional structures that enable significant weight reduction and that possess extended life in the space envi-
ronment, novel structural concepts for deployment to allow packaging of large structures on small launch vehicles, 
and innovative materials and technologies to enable dynamically and thermally stable platforms. Specific topics of 
interest include: 

? High strength-to-weight carbon nanotube-based composite materials for application to thrust structure, high-
strength booms, thin shells, and membranes. 
? Lightweight shielding, self-healing materials, and other countermeasures to protect spacecraft systems from 
harmful effects of space radiation, including materials development. 
? Ultra-lightweight large structural concepts such as deployable and/or inflatable booms, membranes, and aper-
tures for radiometer and synthetic aperture radar missions. 
? Concepts, components, and materials to enable large, lightweight, diffraction limited optical systems including 
membrane optics. 
? Dynamically stable structures utilizing integral vibration control and disturbance/payload isolation including 
spacecraft launch load isolation systems. 
? Modular multifunctional structures with flexible imbedded electronics. 
? Modular multifunctional structural material with imbedded fluids and control functions. 
? Thermally stable materials and components and integrated thermal/structural concepts for high efficiency pas-
sive thermal management. 
? Low cost, high power-to-weight efficiency deployable/inflatable solar arrays and structures. 
? Technologies for mitigating the effects of meteoroids on critical platform components applicable to near-Earth 
missions. 
? Methods for predicting and controlling contamination resulting from the deployment and outgassing of large 
platforms. 
? Unpiloted Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) lightweight material and structure concepts. 
? UAV material systems which enable multiple year mission operations.

E2.02 Guidance, Navigation and Control 
Lead Center: GSFC 
Participating Center(s): None

Future ES architectures will include collaborating assets used in performing coordinated scientific observations. 
These assets will include spacecraft, balloons, aircraft (both piloted and unpiloted), sounding rockets, and surface 
based systems. Advanced GN&C technology is required for each of these platforms that address low power, low 
mass, and low maintenance. A vigorous effort is needed to develop guidance, navigation and control methodologies, 
algorithms, sensors and actuator technologies to enable revolutionary Earth science missions. Exploiting new van-
tage points, developing new sensing strategies, and implementing system-wide techniques that promote agility, 
adaptability, evolvability, scalability, and affordability are characteristic of the technological challenges faced and 
are representative of the significant leap beyond the current state of the art required. Specific areas of research  
include: 
Control Technologies 
? Advanced sensors, actuators, and components with new or enhanced capabilities and performance, as well as 
reduced cost, mass, power, volume, and reduced complexity for all spacecraft GN&C system elements. Addi-
tional emphasis is placed on improved stability, accuracy, and lower noise. 
? Low power, low mass, and low cost propulsive actuators and related subsystem components for generating 
attitude/orbit control torques/forces. Actuators to consume less than one watt of power at three volts, providing 
impulse bits on the order of one micro-N-sec for 3-axis control or 40 milli-N-sec for spin-stabilized control. 
? Control theory, filtering techniques, processing advances, software architectures, and improved environmental 
models for attitude and trajectory determination and prediction. Filtering techniques and expert systems appli-
cations for near real-time trajectory determination and control. Methods for in-flight attitude sensor alignment 
and transfer function calibration. 
? Autonomous execution of system functions including attitude and trajectory determination, monitoring of 
spacecraft functions and environmental conditions, assessing ground system and spacecraft health status, 
ground system fault detection, orbital event and attitude dependent prediction support utilizing advanced tech-
niques such as fuzzy logic and neural networks. 
? Techniques for autonomous in-flight fault detection/identification, fault correction and/or system re-
configuration. 

Component and Design Technology 
? Innovative testbed development capabilities and computer aided engineering, simulation and design tools with 
parallel algorithms for analysis and development of advanced GN&C systems. Open architecture object-
oriented simulation tools and testbed systems for modeling and evaluting complex dynamic space systems. 
? Vision-based GN&C system concepts, subsystems, hardware components and supporting algorithms/flight 
software. Innovative applications of high performance video image processing technology to provide alternative 
solutions to challenging GN&C problems such as spacecraft relative range/attitude determination while in close 
formation or during rendezvous/proximity operations. 
? Rigid and flexible body control methods that are robust to parametric uncertainty and modeling error. 
? Advanced GN&C solutions for balloon-borne stratospheric science payloads, including sub-arcsecond pointing 
control, sub-arcsecond attitude knowledge determination and trajectory guidance 
? Concepts for autonomous guidance and control of spacecraft systems during atmospheric flight phases. 

Spaceborne GPS Navigation/Attitude/Time System Technology 
? Innovations in Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver hardware and algorithms that use GPS code and 
carrier signals to provide spacecraft navigation, attitude, and time: 
- 	Combined navigation/attitude space receivers, including advanced antenna designs/configurations 
- 	Navigation techniques that may employ Wide Area Augmentation System (WAAS) corrections
- 	Navigation, attitude, and control for spacecraft proximity operations 
- 	Innovative uses of GPS which enable new Earth science measurements; for example, the use of differential 
GPS in repeating aircraft flight patterns and the use of ocean-reflected GPS signals

E2.03 Command and Data Handling 
Lead Center: GSFC 
Participating Center(s): None 

Advancing science with reduced levels of mission funding, shorter mission development schedules and reduced 
availability of flight electronic components create new requirements for spacecraft Command and Data Handling 
(C&DH) systems. Specific technology areas for which proposals are being sought include:
 
Onboard Processing
? Volatile data storage - large capacity solid state storage media and data formatter are required to store instru-
ment data until the next ground contact are currently weight and cost constrained.  Development of components 
and packaging techniques that would allow greater density and lower cost components are necessary to support 
the higher science data rates, higher data volumes and smaller spacecraft of the future. 
? General purpose data processing - higher levels of spacecraft autonomy require higher levels of general purpose 
CISC and RISC processing with fault tolerance and error correction (system and application). Development of 
spacecraft computers that match or exceed the commercially available desktop computers is essential to meeting 
the "lights out" spacecraft control requirements.
? Special purpose data processing - higher levels of automated onboard science data processing such as histo-
gramming, feature recognition and image registration are necessary to match the data gathering capabilities of 
future instruments with the limits of spacecraft to Earth communications. Development of technologies such as 
Digital Signal Processors (DSP) and of related hardware is necessary to address these future needs.
? Reconfigurable computing hardware - achieving pure hardware processing capabilities with the flexibility of 
reprogammability would allow different science objectives to be met with the same hardware platform. Devel-
opment of technologies such as radiation hardened Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) and of similar 
components for data communications and processing is necessary to achieve this goal.
? Low-power electronics - in order to provide higher capabilities on smaller less expensive spacecraft, lower 
power consumption components are essential to reducing solar array and battery sizes, affecting the overall 
spacecraft design.  Development of low voltage, such as 3.3V or 2.5V or lower technologies, is essential to 
achieving the power constraints of smaller spacecraft.

Command and Data Transfer
? Subsystem data transfer - communications between various spacecraft subsystems become increasingly impor-
tant in order to achieve higher autonomy. Development of technologies and architectures that increase the rate 
of data transfer above 20 Mbits/s are necessary to achieve the self-diagnosis, autonomous control, and science 
data transfer requirements. 
? Intra-system data transfer - communications within the spacecraft subsystem (between cards within a box) are 
currently a limiting factor in achieving higher overall data throughputs. Development of technologies for com-
munications within a box that would replace the conventional passive backplane is necessary to achieve higher 
science data throughput. 

E2.04 Advanced Communication Technologies for Near-Earth Missions 
Lead Center: GRC 
Participating Center(s): None

To realize the ES Enterprise vision of Sensor-Web, a host of in-space and terrestrial communication link technolo-
gies are required. These technologies are likely to perform in an internet-based multi-point to multi-point 
communication architecture. Furthermore, in this architecture the spacecraft as well as the ground systems will be 
fully capable of interfacing to commercial communication networks to transport data directly to the users.  Innova-
tions are sought in space communications technologies for data delivery from NASA's future Earth Science 
enterprise near-Earth spacecraft, constellations and platforms directly to users. Advanced techniques and products 
are solicited that support communication among NASA spacecraft and commercial GEO networks for data delivery 
to users in a cost-effective manner. In addition, ever increasing demands are being placed on missions conserving 
bandwidth and power resources while driving up the demands for data transmission and access. Innovative commu-
nications technologies are sought at the device, subsystem and system levels in such areas as microwave, millimeter 
wave and optical communications; digital processing, modulation and coding; communications architectures and 
network technologies. Specifically, the required products are described below but are not limited to the following: 

Data Communications Technology 
? High rate data communication microwave or optical system technologies for supporting multi-Gigabit/sec data 
rates between and from spacecraft LEO, MEO or GEO orbits to ground networks. Communications include 
routing, encoding, encrypting of data to allow services on demand to address the need for autonomous space-
craft operations. 
? Direct data distribution communication architectures (including multicasting) from LEO spacecraft directly to 
several users at various data rates and associated communication subsystems.  Small, highly efficient, integrated 
communication receivers and transmitters for inter-spacecraft and constellation communications are needed. 
? Communication link technologies to transfer data from an Earth observing balloon or airplane where the collec-
tion and transmission of data is by Internet protocols. 

Component Technology 
? Innovative approaches to enable higher frequency, miniature, power efficient Traveling Wave Tube Amplifiers 
(TWTAs) operating at millimeter wave frequencies. Of particular interest is the development of TWTA's that 
can operate at communication bit rates of 10 Gbps or higher. 
? High, power wide, bandgap devices and amplifiers based on nitride semiconductors for efficient microwave 
power circuits. 
? Low loss MEMS based RF switches are needed that would enable the development of reconfigurable antennas 
and filters for in flight control of the radiating frequency bandwidth and power. 
? RF component and sub system technologies that enable integration for system on chip packaging type, such as 
mixed signal (analog/digital/optical) communication systems. Low cost, Ka band flat plate array antennas and 
low noise block down-converters are desired for small Earth terminals applications. Low cost, precision track-
ing Ka-band Earth terminals for high data rate (OC-3 to OC-12), direct-to-Earth downlinks from LEO/MEO 
spacecraft are also of interest. Wide scan angle (+/-60 degrees), low profile, transmit/receive Ka-band antennas; 
Ku-Ka band transcievers and closed loop acquisition/tracking algorithms for low-orbit space platforms and 
communication satellites are desired. Fractal-Element antennas are required for size reduction, broad or multi-
bandedness, increased gain and beam agility. 
? Digital components enabling space-based networking. Routers, switches, network interface cards, network 
processors, transceivers, etc. which can lead to integration and implementations in FPGA, ASIC, DSP chip so-
lutions. Internet-based protocol modules and architectures that will provide seamless network continuity 
between terrestrial and aerospace-based platforms and environments.

E2.05 On-Board Propulsion 
Lead Center: GRC
Participating Center(s): GSFC, JSC 

This subtopic seeks propulsion technologies that will significantly increase capabilities and reduce costs for Earth 
science platforms. Propulsion functions include orbit insertion, orbit maintenance, precision positioning, in-space 
maneuvering, and de-orbit. Innovations in chemical and electric propulsion technology are sought for a range of 
spacecraft platform sizes to provide reduced mass, volume, and power while also providing increased flexibility in 
performing missions. Of particular interest are innovations in propulsion that lead to smaller-sized, integrated, 
autonomous spacecraft. The following specific areas are of interest: 

Miniature/Precision Propulsion 
? Propulsion technologies for nanospacecraft (< 20 kg) that emphasize system simplicity, low power require-
ments, and minimal mass. This includes concepts with fundamentally different approaches to propulsion than 
for macroscale spacecraft, leveraging micro-electromechanial system (MEMS) fabrication techniques. More  
robust substrate materials are also sought in addition to innovations in fabricating miniature propulsion systems. 
? Propulsion technologies to provide high-precision (impulse bit < 100 milliNewton-second) stationkeeping and 
attitude control. 
?  Innovative, low-cost, reliable, self-contained propulsion systems for end of life de-orbit. 

Thruster Technology 
? High-performance, high-efficiency electric propulsion technologies, including thrusters and advanced power 
processing, for small, power-limited spacecraft. 
? High-performance (specific impulse > 230 s), high-density monopropellant technologies, including propellant 
formulations, catalytic and noncatalytic decomposition methods, and chamber materials. 
? High-performance (specific impulse > 325 s) bipropellant technologies for either non-toxic or hypergolic pro-
pellant systems. 

Propulsion System Components 
Propellant management components for electric and chemical propulsion systems that reduce total propulsion   
system mass and volume by a factor of two or better while improving reliability and life of existing components. 
Technology areas include:


? Materials compatible with high-temperature, oxidizing, and reactive environments 
? Components for fluid isolation, pressure/mass flow regulation, relief quick disconnect, and flow control 
? Techniques for metering, injection, and ignition of fluids in combustion devices 
? Propellant (liquid and gaseous) storage and pressurization systems 
? Components for xenon storage and flow control 

E2.06 Distributed Spacecraft Systems 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): JPL 

Over the next 10 years, NASA will be launching ten distributed, spacecraft systems specifically for Earth science 
data collection. These distributed systems of orbiting components, which include spacecraft and support elements, 
such as mirrors and communication relays, will revolutionize approaches to conducting earth science. Distributed 
systems will operate under virtual infrastructures capable of responding to changing needs and conditions while 
evolving over time to introduce new capabilities. Distributed spacecraft systems also enable science investigations 
needed for the understanding of the total Earth system and the effects of natural and human-induced changes on the 
global environment. Representative mission scenarios include maintaining a specified satellite formation geometry 
at key points in the trajectory, maintaining the relative motion among co-orbiting spacecraft throughout the orbit, or 
maintaining relative positioning and attitude for targeting points on the Earth or capturing reflected angles off the 
Earth’s surface or atmosphere. Distributed spacecraft concepts of collective pointing (pointing the formation at a 
particular target) or coordinated pointing (pointing the formation to collect related data from different selected an-
gles) are critical to many of these mission scenarios. In addition to the dynamic behavior of each individual 
spacecraft, the collective behavior of all the spacecraft in the formation will determine the quality and the magnitude 
of the science return. Other formations such as large sparse antennas formed by a collection of miniature autono-
mous spacecraft containing the basic antenna elements arranged in an optimal geometric pattern represent an 
emerging novel approach to space-borne antenna design. 

These distributed systems define a new paradigm in how we analyze, design, operate, and maintain space missions. 
In particular, in many cases, many of the spacecraft bus components, which were at one time virtually decoupled 
from the payload or science sensor, are now fully integrated and fully coupled together operationally. For example, 
there are a number of missions where the wavefront measured on an aperture distributed over multiple spacecraft 
would also be the primary information available for feedback as opposed to having independent navigation, ranging, 
or attitude determination sensors. Likewise, many of the elements of the bus which have generally been considered 
decoupled and virtually independent now are continuously, dynamically interacting, which significantly complicates 
the control. A primary example here is that the sensing and control of the attitude and orbit of the vehicle, for many 
formation flying missions, are interacting at rates from several times per orbit to several times per second. This 
drives the need for fully-autonomous, on-board, integrated control as opposed to traditional ground-based orbit 
corrections which happen very infrequently. 

This subtopic calls for novel approaches to autonomous control of distributed spacecraft and the management of 
large fleets of heterogeneous and/or homogeneous assets. Submissions should focus on one or several of the fol-
lowing technologies and system-level concepts: 

? Formation self-organization 
? Reconfigurable control laws 
? Robust and fault-tolerant control laws 
? Algorithms for autonomous formation reconfiguration 
? Nonlinear, robust estimation algorithms 
? Integrated formation guidance and control 
? On-board, closed-loop responsiveness to sensed events 
? Low-cost approaches for formation navigation and control exploiting technologies such as GPS 
? Optimal (e.g., minimum fuel, minimum time) approaches for formation maintenance and maneuvering 
? Unique concepts for dealing with relevant perturbations and disturbances such as J2, solar radiation pressure, 
etc. 
? New modeling techniques to support the technologies and concepts listed above 
It is of significant interest to incorporate the use of expert systems, fuzzy logic, genetic algorithms, neural networks, 
discrete-event system methods, etc. as tools to support the proposed activities. 

E2.07 Storage and Energy Conversion and Power Management and Distribution 
Lead Center: GRC
Participating Center(s): JPL 

Earth science observation missions will employ spacecraft, balloons, sounding rockets, surface assets, and piloted 
and robotic aircraft and marine craft. Advanced power technologies are required for each of these platforms that 
address issues of size, mass, capacity, reliability, and operational costs. A vigorous effort is needed to develop en-
ergy storage, power conversion, and power management and distribution technologies that will enable the 
revolutionary Earth science missions. Exploiting innovative technological opportunities, developing power systems 
for adverse environments, and implementing system-wide techniques which promote scalability, adaptability, flexi-
bility, and affordability are characteristic of the technological challenges to be faced and are representative of the 
type of developments required beyond the current state of the art. 

Storage and Energy Conversion Technologies 
The energy storage and conversion technologies solicited include photovoltaics, batteries, regenerative fuel cells, 
alternative high-power-density storage technologies such as dual-use lightweight flywheels and ultra-capacitors. 
Specific areas of interest are: 

? Battery technologies are needed for spacecraft requiring greater than a 100 watt-hour per kilogram specific 
energy density and a10-year lifetime in LEO and GEO. Rechargeable lithium ion batteries with advanced anode 
and cathode materials and liquid/polymer electrolytes and other advanced battery systems capable of meeting 
the above performance criteria are of interest. For some terrestrial missions, batteries are needed which are     
capable of delivering 30-50 percent of their ambient specific energy at temperatures as low as -100 C. 
? Regenerative fuel cell technology is of interest to NASA because it is an enabling technology for some robotic 
terrestrial Earth observation missions. Improvements in specific energy cycle life, cost, and operational over-
head are needed for small regenerative fuel cells utilized in balloon and other terrestrial observation missions. 
? Future micro-spacecraft require distributed power sources that are integrated with microelectronics de-
vices/instruments. These microelectronic devices/instruments require rechargeable batteries/fuel cells that can 
provide power in the micro to milliwatt range. Due to the low thermal mass of the micro-spacecraft in LEO, 
these spacecraft must operate over a wide temperature range (-100 to 100 C). Long cycle life performance ca-
pability is also needed for micro-rechargeable batteries. 
? Power systems based on micromachining fabrication techniques and in energy storage components based upon 
carbon nano-tube technology and ultracapacitors. 
? Photovoltaic technology with significant improvement(s) in: efficiencies, cost, radiation resistance, and 
wide/low temperature operation are solicited. Potential concepts include rigid arrays, thin film arrays, and vari-
ous concentrator configurations. 
? Advanced solar thermal power conversion technologies for Earth orbiting spacecraft and/or orbit transfer vehi-
cles are of interest. Concentrators may be rigid or inflatable, primary or secondary and address issues such as 
manufacturing, coatings, efficiency, packaging/deployment, and pointing/tracking. Receivers may utilize heat 
pipe or direct absorption technologies intended to minimize mass and volume. Topics of interest in power con-
version include the investigation of compact heat exchangers, advanced materials, and control methods as they 
relate to life, reliability and manufacturability. Heat rejection areas of interest include composite materials, heat 
pipes, pumped loop systems, and packaging and deployment. Also of interest are highly integrated systems that 
combine elements of the above subsystems and show system level benefits. 

Power Management and Distribution Technologies 
Innovative concepts utilizing advanced technologies are needed to manage and distribute power in lighter, smaller, 
cheaper, more durable, and higher performance are required for terrestrial and space Earth observation missions. 
Advances for power management and distribution (PMAD) systems are sought in the following areas: 

? Technologies which enable materials, surfaces, and components to be durable in atomic oxygen, soft x-ray, 
electron, proton, and ultraviolet radiation and thermal cycling environments, lightweight electromagnetic inter-
ference shielding, and high-performance, environmentally durable radiators are of interest to NASA. 
? Advanced electronic materials, devices and circuits are of interest. Capabilities include but are not limited to 
transformers, transistors, integrated circuits, capacitors, ultra-capacitors, electro-optical devices, micro-electro-
mechanical systems (MEMS), sensors, low loss magnetic cores. The area of packaging with improved charac-
teristics capable of wide-temperature operation and/or radiation resistance for use in PMAD systems, motor 
drives, electrical actuation, or electro-mechanical systems are also of interest. 
? Thermal control technologies that are integral to electrical devices with high heat flux capability and advanced 
electronic packaging technologies that reduce volume and mass or combine electromagnetic shielding with 
thermal control are sought. 
? Management, control, and monitoring of power systems for autonomous operation in space are of interest to 
NASA. Capabilities include: fault detection, isolation, and system reconfiguration with including "smart com-
ponents", built-in test, vehicle health management concepts, improved wiring system designs, and advanced 
circuit protection to improve safety, reliability, and performance of terrestrial and space craft. 
? Advanced PMAD electronics for small, low cost spacecraft are sought to simplify interfaces, streamline inte-
gration and testing, and reduce size and mass. 
? Innovative technologies are sought for advanced power-conditioning devices used for housekeeping and control 
of a wide range of regulated voltages on Earth Science payloads to reduce size and mass utilizing hybrid, multi-
chip, and other techniques. 
? Modular, integrated spacecraft PMAD building blocks are sought to drastically reduce the system size, mass, 
and recurring cost through the use of the highest levels of integration based on monolithic, application-specific 
integrated circuits, mixed mode application-specific integrated circuits, field programmable gate arrays, ad-
vanced power packaging techniques, and flexible reusable architectures. 

E2.08 Life-Cycle Integration, Validation, and Distributed Collaboration Technologies 
Lead Center: LaRC
Participating Center(s): JPL, LaRC 

The NASA Earth Science Missions seeks to address all aspects of design development and life-cycle management, 
including the ability to determine complete life-cycle requirements and costs early in the design cycle. There is a 
critical need for modeling, simulation, and asynchronous technologies that support integration throughout the entire 
life-cycle of a mission, project, or vehicle (a typical NASA life-cycle is on the order of 30 years). This integrated 
capability must be supported across diverse geographic, cultural, and computational environments and be used in 
and across Earth Science organizations. This subtopic is focused on component design and commercial advanced 
technologies that support the advancement of engineering tools, and engineering methodologies in Earth Science 
integrated program and project laboratories. 

There are many emerging technological concepts that show promise as potential integrated technologies. Examples 
of some existing concepts which HAVE NOT been incorporated into integrated data life-cycle management are:   
(1) Intelligent Agents (push/portals/information dissemination, (2) Collaborative Analysis and Design, (3) Data 
Mining, (4) Project Management Integration, (5) Document Collaboration, (6) Library, (7) Workflow/Status 
Checking, and (8) Infor- mation Compartmentalization to reduce information overload. Areas of interest include: 

? Software system architectures that enable life-cycle simulation systems to be assembled quickly and tailored for 
specific vehicles or missions. Such systems must be compatible with legacy software codes and must permit the 
insertion of research technology by users. 
? Rapid model assemblers technology that enables components and a knowledge base to assist the modeler in 
providing validated model data suitable for the simulation and analysis of the entire life-cycle of a product.      
? Advanced rapid life cycle simulation tools. 
? Advanced intelligent systems for knowledge capture of design and the design process and engineering process 
assessment methodologies. 
? Software systems and products that reduce the effort required for creating immersive visualization displays of 
intermediate simulations are necessary to validate real time modeling results. Such systems must be general 
enough to support the entire life-cycle of NASA's diverse missions and vehicles. 
? Distributed collaboration tools that support the integration of life-cycle analysis in both modeling and simula-
tion.
? New technologies that allow collection, storage, and retrieval of various forms of integrated data (graphical, 
text, photo, email, sound, etc.) associated with a process life-cycle (full life-cycle greater than 30 years).


E3 Advanced Information Systems Technology 

The Earth Science Enterprise (ESE) acquires, processes and delivers very large (gigabyte to terabyte) volumes of 
remote sensing and related data to public and government entities that apply this information to understand and 
solve problems in Earth science. Information technology is currently employed throughout ESE's space and ground 
systems, and the Advanced Information System Technology theme is soliciting technologies that apply to the end-
to-end system functions. The information system functions found in ESE include but are not limited to data acquisi-
tion, data transmission, data processing, data management and storage, data distribution, data/metadata/document 
search, browse and assess, data subsetting, knowledge discovery, spatial-temporal analysis, and visualization. The 
ESE is interested in advanced information technology that can improve any of these functions in isolation or in 
combination or is able to support alternative architectures that better address the scientific requirements. 

E3.01 Knowledge Discovery and Data Fusion 
Lead Center: JPL 
Participating Center(s): None

NASA's Earth Science Enterprise collects terabyte-scale datasets routinely during its missions and charges the sci-
entific community with extracting usable and scientifically relevant information from them. These data sets may be 
images, multispectral images, time series, or field and particle event lists. They may also be engineering time series 
about spacecraft health collected from on-board sensors. Emphasis has recently been placed on handling and ana-
lyzing in situ data from networks or sensorwebs. In addition to the ongoing challenges entailed by handling, 
analyzing and mining very large data sets, NASA now needs a new framework for performing science data evalua-
tion onboard spacecraft and from in situ sensor networks. New onboard or in situ science capabilities will enable 
mission activities to be directed by scientists without the assistance of a ground sequencing team and the constraints 
of communications links. The science capabilities will be adaptive in nature and must be efficient in transmission of 
the usable key data. 

This subtopic enlists help in developing a new generation of tools and algorithms for effective acquisition and analy-
sis of data and image sets appropriate for ground or onboard/in situ use. Of special interest are: (1) the ability to deal 
quantitatively with uncertainty present in data, perhaps in a statistical framework; (2) development of flexible mod-
els through which observables are linked to quantities of scientific or engineering interest; (3) harnessing database 
technology for organizing the observed data, models, and inferred knowledge, perhaps in onboard or in situ ar-
chives; (4) fusion of multiple datasets for enhanced scientific return; and (5) system concepts for handling 
interactions between onboard science analysis and event detection capabilities and other functions of an autonomous 
spacecraft or sensor web. One or more of these areas should be addressed by every proposal. Specific technologies 
of interest would address: 

? Automated classification of data 
? Supervised and unsupervised learning methods 
? Knowledge discovery techniques 
? Image analysis and segmentation 
? Statistical pattern recognition 
? Time series feature extraction and analysis 
? Trainable object recognition 
? Automatic image registration and change detection 
? Visualization and rendering techniques 
? Spatial-temporal data mining 
? Intelligent, goal-directed data acquisition and/or compression 
? Science data analysis algorithms designed for scalable computing 
? System concepts for onboard science 
? Adaptive data acquisition techniques 

E3.02 Automation and Planning 
Lead Center: ARC 
Participating Center(s): None

Focus is on technologies that make a spacecraft or system react to uncertainties in a robust fashion while achieving a 
set of high-level goals or tasks. Technology innovations in automation and autonomous systems are required to 
support the high level command collection and effective techniques for processing large volumes of data into useful 
information. Intelligent data discovery and searching over heterogeneous data in distributed data stores. Collabora-
tion between Earth scientists and computer scientists is encouraged for these proposals to demonstrate useful results. 
Areas of interest in technological innovation include: 

? Autonomous agents: Intelligent autonomous mobile search agents to support science applications involving data 
available on the Internet 
? Autonomous data collection: Automatic dynamic reconfiguration of UAV or space on-board data gathering 
instruments to make effective use of observing conditions, baseline image data priority scheme, history of ob-
servations and limited on-board resources 
? Planning and scheduling 
? System health and maintenance (space and ground based) 
? Distributed decision making (multiple agents, autonomous systems) 
? Automated software testing 
? Legacy code maintenance and conversion 
? Automatic software generation (i.e., processing algorithms) 
? Software tools for parallelization; tools for production planning 
? Control of FPGA to provide real-time products using hyper-spectral instrument data from airborne platforms 
? Verification and validation of automated systems 

E3.03 High Performance Computing and Networking 
Lead Center: ARC
Participating Center(s): GSFC 

This subtopic focuses on innovations in efficient and effective techniques and technologies for processing large 
volumes of data into useful information. Areas of interest include: 

? High performance processing 
? Computing: Distributed computing, Reconfigurable computing, Parallel/cluster computing, Embedded com-
puting, Optical computing 
? Future computing and storage device technologies: quantum computing, atomic chain electronics, molecular 
computing, nano and quantum device technologies, and carbon nanotube based electronic devices and proposed 
architectures 
? Innovative node connection networks 
? High performance/pervasive networks 
? Techniques to enhance performance of wide-area networks supporting highly distributed data production, ar-
chive, and access functions 
? High-speed processing architectures/systems; applications of distributed computing environments, especially 
"pervasive computing" 
? Efficient methods/algorithms/systems for warehousing scientific multispectral and hyperspectral data and/or 
instrument data for automatic and user-directed mining/monitoring of meaningful trends, parameters, fluctua-
tions, etc. to maximize scientific value of TB-sized data sets 
? Facilitating portability across architectures 
? Advanced Storage and archival techniques (e.g., 3D holographic memory, holographic storage) 
? Load balancing techniques 
? Standards to simplify data providers' activities while facilitating data usage by a large user community 
? Server side technologies supporting highly responsive user-centric access (e.g., handheld PDAs to large date 
centers) 
? Software development environments and methodologies
? Work scheduling as applied to distributed computer systems

E3.04 Geospatial Data Analysis Processing and Visualization Technologies 
Lead Center: SSC 
Participating Center(s): None

Proposals are sought for the development of advanced technologies to enhance human and machine interaction in 
support of scientific, commercial and educational application of remote sensing data. An emphasis is on distributed 
and/or mobile teams in validation and verification exercises and for the commercialization of remote sensing data. 
Focus areas are to provide tools for interpretation, visualization or analysis of remotely sensed data and to provide 
qualitative and quantitative analysis tools and techniques for performance analysis of remotely sensed data. Appli-
cations can support the commercial remote sensing industry and enhance the commercial or educational application 
of Earth science data. Areas of specific interest include: 

? Unique, innovative data reduction and rapid analysis methodologies and algorithms, particularly for hyperspec-
tral data sets 
? Innovative techniques for validation of imaging systems (i.e. thermal and LIDAR imaging systems) 
? Software tools for mobile computing and efficient data collection and/or presentation 
? Innovative approaches for incorporation of GPS data into in situ data collection operations with dynamic links 
to spatial databases including environmental models 
? Innovative techniques to automate quality assurance processes for science data products 
? Distribution and sharing of fused science data sets to correlate similar data sets from diverse spacecraft and 
aerial vehicles and provide unique, commercially useful information products 
? Data merge and fusion software for efficient production and real-time delivery of commercial digital products 
to teams and remote users 
? Tools for enabling distributed scientific collaboration 
? Software to automate the rapid processing and distribution of sub-setting and presenting RS data over a network 
? Software to develop commercial products from digital topography and vegetation canopy data obtained from 
airborne and space-based active optical sensors 
? Innovative approaches that contribute to the understanding of data through the display and visualization of some 
or all of the above data types including providing the linkages and user interface between the cartographic 
model and attribute databases 
? Visualization of multi-variate geospatial data including remotely sensed data from the following: 
-  	airborne and satellite platforms, vector data from public and private archives; 
-  	cartographic databases from public and private sources; 
-  	continuous surface data held as a raster data model; and 
-  	3-D data held in a true 3-D raster model. 

E3.05 Data Management and Visualization 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): None 

This subtopic focuses on innovative approaches to locating, summarizing and presenting large collections of Earth 
science data in a highly distributed and networked environment. Collaboration between Earth scientists and com-
puter scientists is encouraged for the proposals to demonstrate useful results.  Specific examples of topics of interest 
are:

? Design and implementation of a virtual reality CAVE for scientific data visualization Ideas can include: 3-D 
virtual reality environments that will let users 'fly' through the data space; precomputed data fly-throughs that 
let users search within the fly-through space (i.e. fast forward, reverse, slow motion) to locate specific areas of 
interest; incorporation of commodity data compression techniques (such as HDTV/MPEG) for reduced storage 
and transmission requirements; progressive compression and caching techniques that optimize resolution and 
performance when zooming in for additional detail; techniques for georectification, data overlays, data reduc-
tion, and data encoding that work across a distributed environment of widely differing data types and formats; 
development of integrated object oriented storage and compression techniques that are integrated into search  
algorithms; novel 3-D presentation techniques that minimize or eliminate the need for special user devices such 
as goggles or helmets; techniques for high bandwidth collaboration with other users in a distributed environ-
ment; development of techniques that invoke integrated visual and auditory presentation cues; data viewing and 
real-time data browse, including fast, general purpose rendering tools for scientific applications; viewing of 
multi-variate geospatial data including remotely sensed data.
? Support a collaborative environment with tools that facilitate outreach and problem solving.  This environment 
stimulates government & business partnerships with emphases on detailed data analysis conversion capabilities 
to translate science & technology data into information used by specialty communities for making decisions.
? Tools for enabling distributed scientific collaboration.
? Technologies supporting management, storage, search and retrieval of very large, distributed, geo-spatial earth 
science data volumes: Tools to facilitate automatic data product legacy, quality assurance and metadata updates. 
Object relational technologies specific for Earth sciences. Meta-data discovery to facilities the automated use of 
data from different sources. Automatic metric collection and analysis for data use and data ordering. Smart   
Objects Dumb Archives (SODA) and storage, archival and retrieval standards applicable to ESE mission re-
quirements.


E4 Applying Earth Science Measurements 

The Earth Science Enterprise (ESE) continues to search for solutions on how the global environment is changing 
and the effect these changes have on the human societal and economic environment. The planet's continual envi-
ronmental change, the increasing human ability to influence the environment and accelerate the uses of science in 
practical uses is of strong interest to the Enterprise. Innovative tools and techniques that are easy to access and use 
are needed to produce information from Earth science measurements. This information will help guide systemic 
organizational change in the uses of the planet's resources that can result in a balance of sustainable global economic 
development with the preservation of the Earth systems’ ability to renew itself. The goal of this topic is the routine 
use of Earth science results by a broad user community that works daily with land/biota, air, water, educational, and 
emergency issues. 

E4.01 Special Event Imaging and Other Earth Observing Instruments 
Lead Center: MSFC 
Participating Center(s): None

Proposals are sought for the development of innovative technology for the observation of short-lived phenomena in 
the Earth's atmosphere, oceans, and land. These innovations will make important contributions to the ESE’s science 
and application themes. Areas of interest include but are not limited to phenomena such as severe weather, thunder-
storms, lightning, volcanoes, wildfires, flash floods, and ocean blooms. These innovations are intended to increase 
our understanding of the effects of short term forcing on the interacting physical, chemical and biological processes 
that affect the environment in which we live. In addition, it is anticipated that proposed innovations should directly 
contribute to the ESE goal of predicting and mitigating natural hazards. Atmospheric measurements of interest 
include meteorological parameters that play important roles in short lived phenomena including clouds, precipita-
tion, lightning, cloud ice, water vapor, aerosols, winds, temperature and chemical constituents and effluents. Surface 
measurements include temperatures of ocean and land, ocean productivity and color, terrain mapping and changes, 
vegetation index and biological productivity. Sought after technological advances include techniques that lead to 
improved temporal, spatial and spectral response to the above-described geophysical phenomena. These advances 
may be at the component, subsystem, and complete system level and should address reduced size, weight or power, 
improved reliability and lower cost in addition to the requirements for improved performance. These innovations 
should expand the capabilities of airborne systems (manned and unmanned) and the next generation spaceborne 
systems. Innovative sensor approaches are an important element of competitive proposals under this solicitation:
 
? Storm/cloud sensing technology used to obtain a proxy to the instantaneous internal convective strength of 
storms and its relationship to latent heat release and transport.
? Lightning sensing technology to measure total flash distribution, frequency and intensity, and provide flash type 
discrimination (e.g., intracloud versus cloud-to-ground lightning).
? Technology to aid in the mitigation of wildfires, either by early detection or through the measurement of phe-
nomena that contribute to or initiate fires. 
? Agile optical sensors with high temporal, spectral, and spatial resolution.

E4.02 Advanced Instrument Technology for Transitional Boundaries of Land and Water 
Lead Center: SSC 
Participating Center(s): None 

The coastal zone represents a dynamic environment subject to both natural and anthropogenic influences. Innovative 
technologies are sought for the measurement of biological, chemical, and geological processes characteristic of this 
environment. Potential new measurement instrumentation include the following: 

? Surface and subsurface water variables (e.g., chemical composition, nutrient content, biological/organic content, 
optical properties, temperature, salinity, suspended materials) and their changes with depth; 
? Changes in vegetation occurring on small spatial scales or for which the spectral response is influenced by 
changing water levels; 
? Natural hazards (e.g., hurricanes and sea level rise) and man-induced pressures on land use/land cover in near 
shore areas (e.g., particulate loading, nutrient loading); 
? Physicochemical properties associated with subsurface soil and sediment and their changes with depth in envi-
ronments covered by water or vegetation, and 
? Atmospheric variables necessary for the correction of remotely sensed data (e.g., aerosol absorption, ozone 
absorption, oxygen and water vapor absorption, atmospheric path length, Rayleigh scattering, aerosol size     
distribution, and Mie scattering). 

Efforts should emphasize the development or improvement of technology applications in areas such as instrumenta-
tion and tools for data analysis to support these areas of study. Applications technologies should support both 
scientific research and sustainable economic development of the coastal zone. 

? Airborne and ground based multispectral and hyperspectral-imaging systems providing improved spectral 
resolution (e.g., less than 10 nm bandwidths, and less than 1nm resolution). Spatial resolution (e.g., less than 30 
cm ground sampling distance) with higher sensitivities (e.g., .05 NedL) and signal to noise ratios (e.g., greater 
than 1000:1) necessary for water observations but with the dynamic range (e.g., albedo of .01 to .5) to include 
terrestrial observations as well. 
? Ancillary data collection for imaging systems which, including the integration of the Global Positioning    
System, coordinates system, platform attitude, altitude, radiometric and atmospheric data characteristics. 
? Improved data processing and analysis systems for image data mosaics, geometric correction, atmospheric 
correction, radiometric correction, and formatting for ease of analysis. 
? Instruments for measuring apparent and inherent optical properties of rivers, lakes and oceans. 
? Improved instruments for enhancing the collection of water samples and in situ measurements with equipment 
deployed from small and large research vessels (e.g., profiling instruments). 
? Instruments for measuring bio-optical fluorescence of particles in water. 
? Data acquisition systems that integrate multiple sensors integrated data analysis software, networking of multi-
sensor arrays, autonomous acquisition and transmission. 
? Improvements in ground penetrating radar to improve portability expand frequency ranges, receiver sensitivi-
ties, software analysis tools, and integration of ground penetrating radar data with other sensor systems. 
? Instruments and tools for in situ and in vivo analysis of terrestrial and aquatic plant bioactivity (e.g., evapotran-
spiration, optical properties, fluorescence, chlorophyll content, and nutrient uptake). 
? Instruments for collecting and analyzing bottom sediments in water for particle size distribution, nutrients, 
metals and radionuclides. 

E4.03 Innovative Tools and Techniques Supporting Earth Science Measurements 
Lead Center: SSC
Participating Center(s): GSFC 

Proposals are sought for the development of new technologies and technical methods that make Earth science meas-
urements easy to use by practitioners in the areas of community growth, disaster management, environmental quality 
and resource management. This subtopic seeks proposals with team members supporting the development of end-to-
end systems that ingest data to produce information for an end-user community. Proposals should address the full 
range of technologies; aeronautical, space, in situ instrumentation, computational methods, distribution and capa-
bilities required for the proposed development. Developments should take into consideration operational 
requirements across different operating systems, computing platforms, wired and wireless communications capabil-
ity and the technical sophistication of the end user. 

Community Growth 
Innovative technologies are sought in the diverse area of community growth which includes urban planning, real 
estate, utilities, transportation and engineering/construction/development. 

? Urban planning applications include the monitoring of urban growth including the evolution of the correlative 
transportation infrastructure, cadastral mapping, and the production of maps and other analyses within a GIS 
utilizing satellite images as input. 
? Utilities applications involve gas, electric, water, and telecommunications infrastructure and include monitoring 
and site planning and development. 
? Transportation applications cross land, sea, and air and include everything from mapping of the evolving road, 
highway and rail network, pipeline routing and monitoring, cost-surface analysis of new transportation routes, 
traffic monitoring, monitoring barge traffic, international shipping, and sea ice. An additional transportation   
application involves the monitoring of volcanic eruptive plumes to reroute air traffic. 
? Engineering/Construction/Development applications include site and infrastructure mapping, soils, runoff, and 
drainage mapping, and boundary mapping. 

Disaster Management 
Proposals are sought to develop new instrumentation to perform hazard assessment/risk exposure, disaster monitor-
ing, and damage impact assessment related to either natural or manmade disasters. Applications include the 
requirements of public and private first responders and early warning systems. Major natural hazards categories 
include earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, landslides, wildfires, flooding, and severe storms. Major man-
made disasters include oil and other chemical spills, catastrophic release of airborne pollutants, catastrophic release 
of radioactive materials, and ruptures of reservoirs and pipelines. 

The disaster management sector is involved with the operational logistics and mitigation of natural disasters as well 
as post-disaster damage impact assessment. The disaster management theme also includes all insurance applications. 
The insurance and disaster management industries are related, in that they both deal with the risk of natural disasters 
and managing activity before, during, and after disasters. Typical requirements include land cover characterization 
and DEM analysis to assess flood hazards, coastal mapping to assess hurricane and storm risk, and mapping of fuel 
loading to understand brush fire hazard. 

Environmental Quality 
Proposals are to perform a diverse array of activities that generally relate to air and water quality and include in-
strumentation for monitoring, management, and mitigation/remediation of groundwater and soil pollution, acid mine 
drainage and other effects of surface mining and solid waste. Other activities relate to ozone and acid rain, wetlands, 
analysis of environmental impact of development, non-point source pollution and analysis of urban heat islands. The 
disruption of the environment by nitrogen fertilizers, phosphorus, and runoff of animal waste from animal farms is 
also included. 

Resource Management 
New technologies are sought for balancing the resource demands and growth of populations with natural resource 
availability and sustainability. The natural resources applications include several broad types of activity: agriculture, 
forestry, range-land management, nonrenewable and renewable energy, extraction (mining), conservation, fisheries 
and analysis of the regional impacts of climate change. 

? The agricultural sector includes private farmers, agribusiness, government agencies and commodities forecast-
ing, analysis, and speculation. 
? The forestry sector includes global timber and paper businesses, government agencies and forests around the 
world. 
? Range-land management includes land use assessments, planning and monitoring the health of large ranches, 
and Federal lands. 
? Nonrenewable energy applications include the exploration and development of oil, coal, and uranium. Renew-
able resource applications include analysis of solar and wind energy potential. 
? Extraction includes the mining of minerals on all scales. 
? Fisheries include industrial, commercial, and sport fishing, as well as fisheries management and conservation. 
Fish are defined broadly to include all living animals harvested from the ocean or inland water bodies. 

E4.04 Advanced Educational Processes and Tools 
Lead Center: GSFC 
Participating Center(s): ARC, JPL, LaRC, MSFC, SSC

This subtopic focuses on innovation in effective applications related to classroom or museum ready software tools 
for display and/or analysis of Earth science information for learners in both formal and informal settings, and tools 
for organization and dissemination of NASA's Earth Science educational materials to a wide array of educational 
audiences. The Earth Science educational program covers a wide range of audiences from students to adults in both 
classroom settings such as public schools or continuing education venues to all matter of informal learning settings 
such as radio, television, museums, parks, scouts, and the internet. In these venues the learning focuses on the scien-
tific discoveries by the Earth Science enterprise, the technology innovations and the applied use of these discoveries 
and technologies for improved decision making by all.
 
The areas of interest (described below) cross-cut the 3 programmatic areas within the Earth Science Education 
program (formal, informal and professional development) and hence are anticipated to have utility in at least 2 of 
these areas and most likely in all three areas.
 
The first area of interest focuses on innovation in the application of digital library technologies to educational mate-
rials and audiences. The successful proposal must be able to interface with or be integrated into existing educational 
digital library efforts within NASA's Earth Science Education program. These proposals will advance the use and 
usability of globally distributed, networked information resources, and encourage existing and new communities to 
focus on innovative applications areas. Collaboration between Earth scientists, formal or informal education com-
munity professionals, and computer scientists is required for these proposals to demonstrate useful results. Areas of 
interest include:
 
? Extend the current Joined Digital Library (JOIN) effort by developing additional Jini applications. JOIN is a 
collection of tools based on Sun's Jini technology used to implement efficient, decentralized, and distributed 
computing systems and follows "the network is the computer" philosophy.
? Development of formal and informal education audience-specific interfaces (for example but not limited to: 
specific interfaces for students, Park interpreters, TV producers, curriculum developers, etc.). 
? Development of interfaces to promote diversity within educational audiences (such as but not limited to age, 
ethnicity, cultural, urban/rural, etc.). 
? Development of accessibility tools for disabled users to interact and search digital libraries. 
? Development and access to educational materials including new resources for science, mathematics and engi-
neering education at all levels. 
? Development of interoperability tools to integrate dissimilar library archives. 
? Develop applications that enhance the general functionality of existing digital libraries by providing new gen-
eral purpose tools for archive management, metadata ingestion, intelligent search and retrieval. 
? Tools to support online community interaction, which could include new means for gathering, interacting, and 
communicating with other library users.

The second area of interest focuses on innovation in effective software and related development techniques, and in 
highly practical methods for maintaining and disseminating software for use by educational audiences engaged in 
teaching or learning about Earth science. The specific areas of greatest interest are highly-portable, classroom-ready 
software for analysis, visualization and processing of Earth science satellite data, and methods to provide long-term 
support and viability for educational software. Collaboration between Earth scientists, educators, computer scientists 
and "business" model experts is required for these proposals to demonstrate useful results. Areas of interest include: 

? Extend the current Image2000 effort by developing additional plug-in applications and modifying core software 
if necessary. Image2000 is a Java/JAI-based image processing package being developed at GSFC.
? User-friendly, extensible, Earth science satellite image processing software for multiple operating systems, for 
educational use in K - 12, undergraduate and continuing education venues.
? Techniques and software for integrating vector and raster data for the visualization and analysis of geo-spatial 
Earth science data. 
? Tutorials geared toward the use of image processing software for visualization and analysis of Earth science 
related satellite imagery.













This page has intentionally been left blank.







  


8.1.4 HUMAN EXPLORATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF SPACE

The mission of the Human Exploration and Development of Space (HEDS) Enterprise is to open the space frontier 
by exploring, using and enabling the development of space and to expand the human experience into the far reaches 
of space.  In exploring space, HEDS brings people and machines together to overcome the challenges of distance, 
time and environment.  Robotic science missions survey and characterize other bodies as precursors to eventual 
human missions.  In using space, HEDS emphasizes learning how to live and work there and utilize the resources 
and unique environment.  In enabling the development of space, HEDS serves as a catalyst for commercial space 
development.  Throughout, this Enterprise will employ breakthrough technologies and ingenious designs to 
revolutionize human space flight. 

http://www.hq.nasa.gov/osf/heds/


H1 SYSTEMS INTEGRATION, ANALYSIS AND MODELING	98
H1.01 Process/Industrial Engineering Technologies	98
H1.02 Systems Architecture and Infrastructure Modeling	99
H2 SPACE RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT	99
H2.01 In Situ Resources Utilization of Planetary Materials for Human Space Missions	100
H3 SPACE UTILITIES AND POWER	100
H3.01 Thermal Control Systems for Human Space Missions	101
H3.02 Spaceport and In-Space Cryogenic Fluids, Handling, and Storage Technologies	102
H3.03 Spaceport/Range Instrumentation and Control Technologies	103
H3.04 Electromagnetic Physics Measurements, Control, and Simulation Technologies	105
H3.05 Space Solar Power For Human Missions	105
H3.06 Propellant Depots	106
H3.07 Space Nuclear Power For Human Missions	107
H4 HABITATION AND BIOASTRONAUTICS	108
H4.01 Extravehicular Activity Productivity	108
H4.02 Advanced Habitation Systems	109
H5 SPACE ASSEMBLY, INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE	110
H5.01 Automated Rendezvous, Docking and Capture	110
H5.02 Robotics Assistance, Assembly, Maintenance, and Servicing	111
H6 HUMAN EXPLORATION AND EXPEDITIONS	112
H6.01 Automated Exploration Applications of Intelligent Systems	112
H6.02 Flight/Ground Operations and Crew Training	113
H7 SPACE TRANSPORTATION	114
H7.01 Test and Validation Management Methodologies	115
H7.02 High Power Electric Propulsion For Human Missions	115



H1 Systems Integration, Analysis and Modeling 

The goals of this topic are to enable the optimization of investments made in technology for human/robotic explora-
tion and development of space. This includes identification and refinement of advanced system and architecture 
concepts that may dramatically increase the safety and reliability -- and reduce the cost -- of ambitious future human 
exploration missions and campaigns beyond Earth orbit. This topic also encompasses establishing a foundation of 
relationships with the science community and potential commercial or international partners for future exploration 
activities. Specific objectives of this topic involve the development and validation of innovative new analy-
sis/modeling tools and techniques for (1) conducting advanced concepts studies to create/identify innovative new 
approaches to human exploration and the development of space, (2) conducting detailed, end-to-end architecture 
studies incorporating the most promising new systems and infrastructure concepts (3) defining and refining strategic 
research and technology road maps to provide ongoing guidance to technology development efforts. 

H1.01 Process/Industrial Engineering Technologies 
Lead Center: KSC
Participating Center(s): ARC 

Spacecraft launch and payload processing systems have many unique aspects which require development of innova-
tive process or industrial engineering (IE) technologies in order to obtain the substantial benefits derived from 
applying IE principles in other industries. Process/Industrial Engineering is a technical discipline emphasizing the 
interfaces between people, processes, and hardware/software systems in a specific work environment. Proc-
ess/industrial engineering is devoted to the science of process improvement and optimization of operational phases 
of complex systems. The Space Shuttle is NASA's first major program with a long-term operational phase. All 
major current and potential future human space flight programs (the International Space Station, X-vehicles, and 
extended human exploration) are also projected to have lengthy operational phases. Payload processing activities 
emphasize repeatable processes and improved customer satisfaction. Therefore, the strategic importance of IE tech-
nologies to NASA is rapidly increasing. Advanced spaceport technologies for designing, improving, and managing 
processes are needed to support spacecraft ground processing at KSC. Process/industrial engineering technologies 
should support NASA's goal of achieving safe, reliable, and low cost space access. Proposals should also identify 
potential applications for enhancing the operational phases of new NASA programs and aviation depot maintenance 
processes. Proposals may address the development of new concepts, methodologies, processes, and/or software 
support systems which advance the state-of-the-art in one or any combination of the following general areas of 
interest: operations research; process simulation modeling; statistical process control; planning and scheduling 
systems; project management risk analysis; decision analysis; cost-benefit analysis; task/work methods analysis; 
work measurement; human factors engineering; ergonomics; performance metrics; and management information 
systems. Specific interests for the 2001 solicitation include, but are not limited to, those listed below: 

? Simulation tools that assist engineers in process or product design and development while reducing human error 
risk factors. 
? Development of project management tools that identify project or system risk factors while assessing cost and 
schedule impacts. 
? Toolkits for advanced task/methods analysis and procedure design technologies (including process failure 
modes and effects analyses) for complex, long-duration, and infrequent spacecraft test and checkout activities. 
? Development of computer-based training for writing human-centered procedures. Development of evaluation 
methods and metrics for procedure re-design. 
? Advanced technologies for generating and delivering effective test and checkout procedures. Knowledge-based 
tools and methods for providing highly effective just-in-time task level training in the operational environment. 
? Knowledge-based systems engineering tools for predicting operational technician traps and recommending 
effective design alternatives. 
? Tools to measure and improve human-computer interaction with computer consoles and portable data collection 
devices. 
? Advanced operations research and human factors engineering tools for optimizing utilization of scarce re-
sources and minimizing the potential for human error during depot-level maintenance of reusable launch 
vehicles and aircraft, expendable launch vehicle test and checkout activities, and payload processing activities. 
? Advanced statistical quality control techniques for ensuring high quality, affordable manufacturing and mainte-
nance of unique spacecraft hardware. Automated statistical quality control algorithms that can be applied to data 
streams generated by space vehicle and ground hardware/software health monitoring systems. 
? Advanced operations process modeling, simulation, verification and validation technologies for cost-effective 
evaluation of the impacts of proposed changes to operational processes and procedures. Proposed changes in-
clude hardware/software upgrades, process enhancements, and technology infusions. 
? Operations research technologies enabling seamless integration of airports and spaceports of the future. 

H1.02 Systems Architecture and Infrastructure Modeling 
Lead Center: MSFC 
Participating Center(s): None

This subtopic focuses on the development of innovative computer based tools that can effectively evaluate and 
analyze competing technologies for future HEDS requirements from a systems point-of-view. These tools should 
include state-of-the-art breakthroughs and beyond. The tools should be adaptable to various NASA missions as well 
as to the non-space community. This subtopic should act as a building block to ultimately achieving an end-to-end 
evaluation tool that identifies the technology development that is required. This will reduce program cost and sched-
ule while increasing the safety and reliability of future missions. The tools developed and matured under this 
subtopic should embrace the direction that advanced programming has been heading such as virtual reality, neural 
networks and fuzzy logic. Specific areas of interest include: 

? A general purpose concept analysis and design optimization tool that provides the capability to evaluate or 
optimize a hierarchical system design based on user defined goals, parameters and criteria. 
? Graphical user interfaces (GUI) for depicting the hierarchical structure, relationships between systems and 
friendly user interfaces. 
? Automate the input of data or the transfer of output data to other software tools. 
? Optimization requirements including user defined goals and interactive changes to design parameters. 
? Biologically inspired design optimization algorithms such as automated reasoning, genetic algorithms and 
neural networks. 
? Modeling structure that can accommodate systems and subsystems with their technology options. The model 
structure should be mission generic yet capable of capturing HEDS systems elements for assessing specific  
mission concepts. For example, the model should be capable of assessing the impact of specifying that a par-
ticular technology option be used for all elements in mission architecture, including vehicle, surface and orbital 
infrastructure subsystems. 
? Interfaces for interchange of data or sharing of capabilities between models or concurrent execution. This  
includes the development of standards for subsystem models and modification or design of hooks within exist-
ing models for input/output transfer and use of a common technology database. 
? Common databases with technology performance and cost data. The tools should have the capability to ensure 
that common data is being used appropriately in all models. 
? The tools should link the models and databases into a system to allow for trade studies, sensitivity analysis and 
identify the required technologies that need to be developed. 
? Tools with the capability to perform system and technology sensitivities in order to identify mission architecture 
impacts. 
? Tools that model technology performance, analyze competing technologies and then identify promising explo-
ration concepts, architectures, and metrics to focus on technology development. 

This subtopic focuses on developing innovative computer based tools that can evaluate and analyze competing 
technologies from a systems point-of-view will allow the proposers to have a product suitable for marketing by the 
end of phase III. The tools should be applicable to a number of different industries. 


H2 Space Resources Development 

The goals of this topic are to drive down the cost of human/robotic exploration missions and campaigns. This in-
cludes supporting improved health and safety for human explorers beyond Earth orbit. It also includes working with 
the space science community to test concepts and technologies. The objectives of this topic include: (1) Developing 
and validating the technology to utilize local resources, such as Regolith/Minerals, Ices and Atmosphere -- in order 
to (2) Produce, process and deliver consumables, including propellants (storable and cryogenic), life support and 
other gases and water. (3) Fabricate key physical structural systems and their elements from local materials. This 
includes radiation shielding, structural elements (e.g., trusses, panels, etc.), and mechanical spares for mission  
system elements. (4) Enable local fabrication of selected "finished products" and/or "end-items" including photo-
voltaic cells and solar arrays, wires, tubes, connectors, etc., and pressurized volumes. (5) Testing key technologies 
and demonstrating innovative new systems concepts in space. (6) Establishing a foundation for profitable commer-
cial development of the resulting technologies in the mid- to far-term.

H2.01 In Situ Resources Utilization of Planetary Materials for Human Space Missions 
Lead Center: JSC
Participating Center(s): ARC, KSC 

Significant benefits for future human missions to the Moon, Mars, and other planetary bodies may be attained by 
making maximum use of local, indigenous materials as a source for products such as propellants, life support con-
sumables, radiation protection, and construction materials. By pursuing the philosophy of "make what you need at 
the planet instead of bringing it all the way from Earth", In situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) can result in reduction 
of mass requirements for the exploration mission, reduction in mission risk and cost, and expanded human presence 
on the planetary surface. It can also enable the long-term commercial development of space by enabling low cost 
transportation, and providing the resources, technologies, and infrastructure required to allow commercial develop-
ment activities to grow. Even though NASA currently does not have approved plans for human exploration missions 
beyond Low Earth Orbit, studies and mission design efforts and technology and system development activities are 
being pursued to develop technologies and mission concepts that can significantly reduce mission mass, cost, and 
risk and to enhance or enable robotic and human exploration initiatives. Key goals are to minimize the mass which 
must be brought from the Earth (including the equipment required to move or process the resource), minimize power 
consumption and Earth supplied processing consumables, enable or enhance new mission concepts not possible 
without the use of space resources, and develop infrastructure, resources, and products to promote the commerciali-
zation of space. 

Proposals may be submitted for ISRU technologies at various destinations including the Moon, Mars, asteroids, 
planetary moons, etc. Areas for investigation of specific technologies for components or systems, and methods 
include the following: 

? Digging, sorting, mineral separation, and transporting regolith or other materials to a processing reactor. Such 
systems should be lightweight, efficient, and capable of operating with minimal human supervision and mainte-
nance. 
? Extracting, collecting, and processing mission enabling or enhancing consumables (propellants, oxygen, etc.), 
or commercially viable resources and/or products from atmospheric, surface, and subsurface space resources 
that are power efficient, minimize the amount of equipment that must be brought from Earth, and require a 
minimum of Earth-supplied reagents. Emphasis should be placed on innovative designs and processes, and   
proposals for water/ice extraction or drilling should recognize the uncertainty and potential variability of both 
the location and abundance of such water. 
? Processing surface materials into useful equipment (e.g., solar panels, radio antennas, replacement parts, etc.) 
which requires no further manufacturing or assembly. 
? Extracting, processing, and manufacturing in situ materials that can be used for construction of products, habit-
able structures, and infrastructure on the Moon or Mars that enable long-term settlement. 


H3 Space Utilities and Power 

A key goal of the HEDS space utilities and power topic includes working with appropriate NASA and external 
organizations to identify and establish robust sources for abundant power for in-space and surface exploration 
systems for science discovery and the commercial development of space. A key objective is to drive down the cost 
of human/robotic exploration missions and campaigns. Some specific objectives include the following: (1) Devel-
opment and validation of technology for a range of power levels and/or requirements, such as large space platforms, 
space transportation systems, including mobile, piloted or human-supporting lunar or planetary surface systems, and 
various other HEDS systems (e.g., habitats, extravehicular activity (EVA) systems, etc.). (2) Developing a founda-
tion for the future testing and validation of key technologies and demonstrate innovative new human exploration and 
development of space systems concepts in space. (3) Establishing a foundation for profitable commercial develop-
ment of space applications of these technologies in the mid- to far-term. Some of the specific technical objectives 
targeted by this topic include space solar power systems, space nuclear power systems for surface and in-space 
power applications, wireless power transmission systems, cryogenic propellant depots, and energy storage systems.

H3.01 Thermal Control Systems for Human Space Missions
Lead Center: JSC
Participating Center(s): MSFC 

Thermal control is an essential part of any space vehicle as it provides the necessary thermal environment for the 
crew and equipment to operate efficiently during the mission. The requirements for human-rating and the specified 
temperature range (275 K - 310 K) drive the development of enabling active thermal control technologies to support 
human space exploration. A primary goal is to provide advanced thermal system technologies which are highly 
reliable and possess low mass, size and power requirements (i.e., reduced cost). Areas in which innovations are 
solicited include the following: 

? Fault tolerant fluid-to-fluid heat exchangers that cannot fail in a way that permits leakage between fluid loops. 
? Heat pumps to acquire waste heat at near 273 K and reject the heat above 300 K. 
? Internal heat pumps or alternative technologies to provide cabin dehumidification on-orbit with a fluid heat sink 
of 288 to 298 K. 
? Lightweight, flexible radiators which can be stowed compactly for transport and deployed for use. 
? Micro-meteoroid tolerant and freeze/thaw tolerant radiators. 
? Environmentally friendly, non-toxic single and two-phase working fluids that either freeze below 75 K or do 
not significantly change density upon freezing or thawing. 
? Two-phase transport loops and associated controls which require low power for operations. Thermal energy 
storage systems. 
? Controllable water evaporator heat rejection devices for use in vacuum environments. 
? Microgravity compatible refrigerator/freezer technologies and/or system designs for food or scientific samples 
storage. Also, refrigerator/freezer technologies and/or system designs for long-duration planetary (partial grav-
ity) usage. 
? Low vibration or vibration isolating fluid components including fans, pumps, compressors, coolers, tubing, 
fittings, heat exchangers, and valves for use in microgravity processing applications. 
? Highly accurate, remotely monitored, in situ, non-intrusive thermal instrumentation for meeting in-space   
science, manufacturing and safety needs.
? Materials and concepts for thermally efficient containment and processing of hazardous materials and samples 
in space. 
? Advanced analytical tools for thermal design and analyses, which are amenable to concurrent engineering proc-
esses. 
? Fluid quick disconnects that allow activation without exact alignment of the halves that have low activation 
force (approx. 10 lbf) with internal pressures of 500 psi, that are not sensitive to level 200 contamination, that 
leak less than 1x10-6 sccs He at 500 psia over a temperature range of –100 F to +100 F and that can be used 
with ammonia, water or R-134a. 

Proposers should indicate explicitly how their research is expected to improve the mass, power, volume, safety, 
reliability, and/or design and analyses techniques for future thermal control systems for human space missions as 
compared to state-of-the-art technologies. 





H3.02 Spaceport and In-Space Cryogenic Fluids, Handling, and Storage Technologies 
Lead Center: KSC
Participating Center(s): GRC, JSC, MSFC 

Advanced technologies are being solicited for cryogenic technologies for multiple aerospace applications. New and 
innovative techniques are desired in spaceport technologies, space environment applications, and extra-terrestrial 
applications (lunar and Mars environments). These focus areas include technologies that will increase the perform-
ance, operational efficiencies, safety, and reliability of cryogenic systems and provide for autonomous cryogenic 
operations in Earth, space and extraterrestrial environments. 

Planetary Spaceport Cryogenic Fluids, Handling and Storage Technologies 
Advanced technologies are being solicited for spaceport cryogenic systems for conditioning, storage, densification 
(sub-cooling) of cryogenic propellants and transfer and control to improve operational efficiencies, safety and reli-
ability, and enable autonomous loading and off-loading operations. Planetary spaceports include Earth, Moon and 
Mars applications. Extraterrestrial spaceport systems have an added emphasis for lightweight and highly reliable 
characteristics.  Specific areas of interest include the following: 

? Cryogenic pumping systems that minimize thermal losses and can be utilized in liquid oxygen and/or liquid 
hydrogen and other cryogenic systems. These systems should possess high reliability and demonstrate ease of 
maintenance. 
? New technology valves for cryogenic applications, including LOX, LH2, and LCH4 that minimize thermal 
losses and pressure drops across the component. Components should be adaptable to electromechanical activa-
tion and in a size range from 1/2 to 5 inches. 
? Leak-proof compliant cryogenic quick disconnects that can be reliably mated, de-mated, and re-mated under 
misalignment (15 degrees for connectors 1-inch and larger) and dusty/windy conditions. Smaller connectors 
(1/4-inch to 1-inch) that require a low connecting force (for Mars applications) are critical. Reconnect issues 
that must be resolved include thermal (potential icing), sealing (surface damage due to environmental contami-
nation), and cleanliness (potentially imposed by wind, etc.). 
? Leak-proof, easy to use cryogenic couplings utilizing robust sealing technology that are compatible with cryo-
genic temperatures and liquid oxygen. 
? New and innovative technologies to provide for propellant densification (sub-cooled LH2 and LOX). These 
technologies should provide for increased efficiencies and reduced costs associated in producing densified pro-
pellants. 
? Recovery and storage system for gaseous hydrogen as vented from propellant storage (1000 gal/day) and/or 
during vehicle loading and drain-back operations (100,000 gal/day). Gaseous helium recovery (from hydrogen 
stream) is also desired. 
? Propellant servicing mechanisms including umbilical alignment, latching, and release mechanisms which pro-
vide reliable and verifiable single and multiple connector mating, and enable autonomous loading operations. 
Integrated alignment and connection methods are desirable. Innovative latching technologies such as shape 
memory alloy applications and technologies that allow for maximum preload with minimal application loading 
are also desirable. 
? A modular, reliable and cost effective oxygen and hydrogen production and liquefaction architecture are needed 
to enable production at an Earth based launch site. A modular system is desired to add/subtract capacity as 
needs fluctuate. Natural gas or coal as feedstock with a production ratio of 1 ton LH2 to 10 ton LOX is desired. 
The system may also produce electricity and LN2 (poly-generation plant). Modules that can be idle for ex-
tended periods and then brought on line quickly (48 hours or less) are also desired. 
? Flowmeters and densitometers for measurement of densified, multi-phase cryogen at flowrates from 1.4 to 5.6 
liter per second. 
? Energy efficient, cost effective distribution systems for transfer of cryogens over long distances (up to several 
miles in distance). 
? Low heat leak, lightweight, electromechanical shut-off valves for LO2 and LCH4 applications in size ranges 
from 1 to 1.5 inches. 
? Cryocooler systems with cooling capacity greater than 10 watts operating in the 20-40 K range. 
? Efficient LH2 storage systems for transporting LH2 to Mars and storage on the Martian surface. 

In-Space Environment Cryogenic Fluids, Handling and Storage Technologies 
Components or concept proposals are being solicited to improve the performance, operating efficiency, safety and 
reliability of cryogenic fluid storage and handling in a low gravity (10-6 g to 10-2 g) environment. Tanks of high 
energy propellant fluids, stored in their most efficient state (as low pressure sub-critical cryogenic fluids), are re-
quired for spacecraft and orbit transfer vehicle propulsion and power systems and space station life support. 
Generally, applications of this technology require long term storage (> 30 days), on-orbit fluid transfer and supply 
and unique instrumentation. Technology innovations are required in the following areas: 

? Lightweight, low thermal conductivity cryogenic tanks strut and support concepts 
? Low thermal conductivity cryogenic tank penetrations, i.e., instrumentation feed-throughs, feedlines, vent lines 
? Lightweight, insulating, thermal protection schemes 
? Robust insulation concepts for multiple launch/landing and ambient/vacuum pressure cycles 
? Devices for vapor-free acquisition of cryogenic liquids 
? Small, low power, lightweight (2 liter/minute) liquid oxygen transfer pumps 
? Tank pressure control (e.g., thermodynamic vent) and/or integrated tank boil-off control and product liquefac-
tion technologies 
? Lightweight mechanical fittings and flex hoses with low heat leak 
? Autonomous cryogenic disconnects and couplings 
? Instrumentation for monitoring cryogens in low gravity including mass quantity gauging, liquid-vapor sensing 
and free surface imaging 

H3.03 Spaceport/Range Instrumentation and Control Technologies 
Lead Center: KSC 
Participating Center(s): None

The goal of this subtopic is to develop instrumentation, systems and associated sensors required by Space-
ports/Ranges to operate future generation space vehicles safely and efficiently. Technologies developed under this 
subtopic shall support the reduction of vehicle and payload cost per pound to orbit while increasing the safety of 
ground and flight operations by orders of magnitude. 

The vision of the future is that multiple vehicles will be operating simultaneously in various phases of processing, 
launch, and landing from multiple terrestrial and planetary Spaceports/Ranges. In order to realize this, it will be 
necessary to have systems that integrate a suite of ground and space based sensors and instrumentation that provide 
the total Spaceports/Ranges solution. These systems need to be distributed and capable of supporting multiple sites 
and operational phases without reconfiguration. This will require autonomous knowledge based expert systems that 
can be implemented at multiple sites and require minimal infrastructure and personnel to operate. 

This subtopic focuses on the development of sensors, instrumentation systems, meteorological and range technolo-
gies that uniquely suited to and used at Earth and planetary spaceports for processing, launch, tracking, controlling, 
and landing of space vehicles. The specific focuses are on sensors, transducers, instrumentation and systems that 
will be applied to the following areas: 

Space Based Range 
This focus area includes the development of technologies for satellite platforms or vehicles that provide remote 
sensing and instrumentation systems that perform or support the following functions: metric tracking, area surveil-
lance, navigation aids, and atmospheric sensing. Each of these functions will require development of one or more of 
the following technologies; Integrated multi-, hyper-, and ultra-spectral instrumentation and sensors; Multi-channel 
transceivers. These will provide directors/controllers and vehicles vital real-time data that is necessary to interface 
with the National Airspace System for all phases of ascent and decent. 

Decision Models and Simulation 
New and innovative methods to ensure safe and cost effective real-time decision models that safely reduce conser-
vatism and provide the necessary fidelity. Improvements in real-time computational capability and code 
development can significantly improve assessments. Specific technologies needed. 

Range Dispersion Monitoring Instrumentation
Develop ground-based and airborne time-resolved real-time instruments to measure atmospheric chemical species 
associated with spaceport propellants and combustion products. Deployable instruments, both physical sampling and 
remote sensing, shall be capable of being networked to provide real-time data to a central processor for formatting 
and ingestion into a spaceport decision model. Sensors will be capable of identifying specific chemical species 
including hydrogen chloride, nitrogen dioxide, hydrazine (anhydrous, monomethyl, and unsymmetrical dimethyl), 
hydrocarbons, sulfur hexafluoride, and particulate matter. 
 
Conflagration Decision Model: Heat and mass emission factors from solid propellant burning under water needs to 
be assessed and modeled. In addition to heat quenching, the chemical interaction of burning solid propellant and 
associated combustion products needs to be known as a function of water depth and salinity. The model output 
should yield mass and heat content of gaseous products including hydrogen chloride, solid products including par-
ticulate aluminum oxide and ammonium perchlorate, and liquid products including hydrochloric acid for unit mass 
of solid propellant involved, Unburnt propellant mass should also be assessed. Assessments are to be based on 
empirical studies using Space Shuttle-like solid propellants.

Decision Model On-Screen Editor
Develop methodology to enable on-screen editing of graphical outputs, such as meteorological parameters utilized in 
spaceport decision models. Shapes, slopes, and uncertainty bandwidths of curves should be automatically digitized 
based on operator on-screen inputs. This editing capability must allow the user to make changes to the forecasted 
toxic corridor in near real time. Methodology must execute with sufficient speed to accommodate user inputs, deci-
sion model re-evaluations, and input refinements to assess decisions, consequences, and uncertainties. Source code 
and executable code must be provided for inclusion in various spaceport decision models. 

Knowledge-based Database
Develop and document a knowledge-based database with the capability to automatically maintain itself. This will 
include self-editing, error correction, and automatic formatting and filing of ingested data. The database will auto-
matically poll the remote sensors on a given time schedule, evaluate the data and flag those sensors not responding 
with the correct data. Any data outside the preset parameters will be adjusted to a best fit, flagged and filed auto-
matically. 

Command, Control and Monitoring 
New and Innovative technologies that include real-time advisory systems for the operator's and the user's; data 
reduction, analysis, and archiving; configuration validation and management; and low cost high fidelity training 
capabilities that minimize impact to operational systems. There is additional focus on sensors, transducers and in-
strumentation systems uniquely suited for instrumentation test beds to be characterized as payloads on Space Shuttle 
or other future space vehicle flights or Ground Support Equipment. 

Miniature Mass Spectrometers for Hazardous Gas Detection
Development is needed for small, lightweight, rugged, inexpensive, mass spectrometers or other technology capable 
of measuring one part per million to 100 percent of hydrogen, helium, nitrogen, oxygen, and argon in a high-
vibration environment. These instruments will be used on and around space launch vehicles for leak detection during 
ground processing, test firings, pre-launch propellant loading, launch, ascent, and descent (post reentry). The pri-
mary improvements in technology and performance over current instruments are size and weight reduction, cost 
reduction, and operation in a high vibration environment. Current instruments typically fill one or more equipment 
racks, weigh several hundred kilograms, and must be operated in an air conditioned, vibration free environment, 
typically several hundred feet from the potential leak locations. Their cost, size, and complexity mandate that each 
instrument must sample multiple leak locations on a time-shared basis. The target cost of an operational version of 
the desired instrument is $5,000-$20,000 each. The needed instrument accuracy is plus or minus ten parts per mil-
lion or 5 percent of reading, whichever error is greater. The instrument should possess mass resolution capable of 
meeting the desired accuracy goals for hydrogen in the presence of 100 percent helium and for oxygen in the pres-
ence of 100 percent nitrogen. The instrument should be less than 3500 cubic centimeters total volume and have mass 
less than ten kilograms, including high-vacuum pump. The instrument should be able to withstand an 18 G vibration 
over a range of 5-2500 Hz. for 15 minutes on each axis without damage. The instrument should be capable of meet-
ing the specified accuracy requirements for twelve hours without calibration. It should be capable of analyzing all 
five specified gases and providing the concentration of each within one second. While advances are primarily sought 
in development of complete instruments, advances in key enabling technology such as vacuum pumps, ionizers, and 
detectors are also sought. 

H3.04 Electromagnetic Physics Measurements, Control, and Simulation Technologies 
Lead Center: KSC 
Participating Center(s): None

Spacecraft launch operations involving toxic and explosive vapors and solid propellants as well as the operation of 
electronic components in space and in extra-terrestrial environments have created special concerns for understanding 
the electromagnetic dynamics of surfaces in contact with each other and the production of electrostatic charge due to 
this interaction. Specific interests for the 2001 solicitation include but are not limited to those listed below: 

? Development of instrumentation to study the electromagnetic dynamics of surfaces in sliding contact with each 
other and its effects on the generation of electrostatic charge under a wide range of atmospheric conditions. 
Frictional contact between surfaces generates energetic electrons, ions, and photons. NASA is interested in in-
strumentation to measure the number and the type of the particles transferred as well the amount of mass 
transferred between surfaces after breaking contact. These instruments should be compact and light-weight and 
work under ultrahigh vacuum conditions (10-12 Torr). 
? Development of dust generators that would deliver 1 to 40 mm uncharged particles at speeds ranging from 10 to 
30 m/s at atmospheric pressures ranging from 100 mTorr to 760 Torr and at temperatures ranging from -100° C 
to 20° C. 
? Develop techniques for measuring the charge-to-mass ratio and the speed of dry particles (1 to 100 mm) under 
high vacuum conditions (10-12 torr) over a broad range of temperatures. These techniques must be capable of 
supporting the future development of the electromagnetic characterization of materials during exposure to dust 
impingement in a vacuum, atmospheric, and non-terrestrial atmospheric environments. 
? Develop improved triboelectric charge measurement and decay test devices that will become part of new testing 
standards for protective clothing and other materials to be used in space, extra-terrestrial and hazardous envi-
ronments. Performance of the devices should be compared to similar data already collected by the Kennedy 
Space Center using existing technology. Proposals should focus on electric field detection equipment, digital 
scope electronics, air/gas ionization and motorized devices. Instruments and devices proposed for demonstration 
should be light weight, small in size, and suitable for operation in a vacuum with temperature ranges from -160° 
C (- 250° F) to 200° C (400° F), in various gaseous environments with pressures from 100 millitorr to 5000 torr 
and temperatures from -160° C (- 250° F) to 200° C (400° F) as well as terrestrial environments with tempera-
tures from - 75° C (-100° F) to 65° C (150° F) and humidity from 10 percent to 100 percent. New concepts 
should give consideration to computer hardware and software to maximize capabilities to induce, detect, ac-
quire, and record electric fields on material samples while plotting wave-forms in volts versus time. 
? Development of miniature sensors for detecting and measuring the electric potential and charge distribution 
generated on spacecraft and landers. Developing software for modeling spacecraft and landers electric poten-
tials based on previous flight experiment data and models. 
? Develop cost-effective methods for ground based simulation of the environments of low Earth orbit space, deep 
space and planetary surfaces. 

H3.05 Space Solar Power For Human Missions 
Lead Center: MSFC 
Participating Center(s): None

The goal of this activity is to conduct preliminary strategic technology research and development to enable large, 
multi-megawatt Space Solar Power (SSP) systems and wireless power transmission (WPT) for government missions 
and commercial markets (in-space and terrestrial). Dramatic advances in solar power generation (SPG) are needed 
for in space and surface use including systems for 50-100 kWe, 100-1000 kWe, and 1-10 MWe. These systems are 
required for large-scale space utilities and many transportation options. Solar power generation research and devel-
opment required for collection of solar energy and conversion to electrical energy are critical to meet the low 
cost/specific mass goals for HEDS missions. Systems approaches for the utilization of SSP concepts and technolo-
gies, ranging from the near-term to the far-term, including systems concepts, architectures, technology, 
infrastructure (e.g., transportation), and economics have been modeled and refined under NASA’s Space SSP   
Exploratory Research and Technology Program. Also, under the program technology research, development and 
demonstration activities to produce proof-of-concept validation of critical SSP elements for both nearer and farther-
term applications have been conducted. Existing investments will be harvested for near-term demos, while multiple 
research and technology paths for large SSP systems will be pursued. 

Goal 
New technologies for enabling megawatt-class, low-mass, extremely high voltage solar arrays for large space solar 
power applications, including transportation vehicles, orbital facilities, and surface infrastructures. 

Technology Elements 
? Solar power generation 
? Wireless power transmission 
? Power management and distribution (PMAD) 
? Energy storage 
? Structures, materials and controls 
? Thermal management and materials 
? Robotic assembly, maintenance and operations 

Objectives 
? Develop advanced SSP concepts that incorporate the above listed technology elements 
? Develop various SPG concepts including photovoltaic concentrator systems, solar thermal dynamic concentra-
tor systems and thin film systems 
? Integrate information on scores of technology options across several different systems concepts 
? Perform tightly focused research and technology activities targeting all poles and promising system concepts 
? Develop initial small-scale demonstrations of key SSP concepts and components using nearer-term technologies 

Tasks 
? Develop advanced SSP system technologies
? Undertake required/beneficial technology demonstrations (e.g., solar electric transportation applications, SPG, 
WPT, etc.) 
? Conduct technology development work in the areas of SPG; WPT; PMAD; energy storage; structures, materials 
and controls; thermal management and materials; and robotic assembly, maintenance and operations 

H3.06 Propellant Depots 
Lead Center: MSFC 
Participating Center(s): GRC

The focus of this subtopic is to develop and advance enabling technologies required to build and operate a propellant 
depot near Earth or in deep space. Cryogenic propellant storage depot technology is a unique area in that it has been 
studied in detail but little research has been accomplished in space, where the unique effects of low gravity come 
into play. The propellant depot will provide affordable propellants and similar consumables as needed in the devel-
opment of space. A propellant depot not only requires technology development in key areas such as cryogenic 
storage or fluid transfer but in other areas such as lightweight structures, highly reliable connectors and autonomous 
operations. These technologies can be applicable to a broad range of propellant depot concepts or specific to a cer-
tain design. Specific areas of interest include: 

? Electrolysis system that manufactures cryogenic propellants from water or ice in a low gravity environment. 
This system should incorporate innovative techniques and components to provide an automated, safe and highly 
reliable process. 
? Water storage and transfer interface such as a bladder positive-expulsion system or other innovative techniques. 
? Reliable and safe cryogenic storage for extended periods of time. This includes zero boil-off systems, advanced 
insulations and thermal control techniques such as vapor cooled shielding, systems utilizing the boil-off for drag 
make-up and innovative tank designs. 
? Automated assembly, operations and maintenance. This includes cryogenic connects, disconnects and cou-
plings; robotic assembly and repair; docking of large components; health monitoring and smart systems. 
? Lightweight structures including inflatables, deployables and advanced composites. 
? Micrometeoroid and space debris protection schemes and associated technologies including advanced 
lightweight materials, self-healing, integration with other structures and tankage and possible avoidance tech-
niques. 
? Associated propellant tank-set technologies including fluid slosh and orientation in low gravity environments, 
tank support structure dynamic interaction in orbit, support struts thermal performance, integrated insulation,  
instrumentation and plumbing penetrations and coating degradation. 
? Schemes for warm tank chill down including spray nozzle configurations, liquid flow rate and duration, number 
of gas venting steps and performance in a low gravity environment. 
? Stratification / hot spot management including mixing needs, mixing strategies and performance determination 
in low gravity environments. 
? Low gravity performance and operating life determination of key components such as the liquid pumps, con-
densers, pressurization, liquid acquisition device, refrigerator and mass gauging instrumentation. 
? Low heat leak valves and lines that are highly reliable with long life. 
? Connects/disconnects with small or no fluid and heat leakage. The connects/disconnects should also have small 
pressure drops, small force and alignment requirements and long life with high reliability. 
? Procedure for the capability for a no-vent fill with consideration given to micro-g condensation and fluid mix-
ing. 

Several options are available to test the technology needed for propellant depots. Technologies can be tested in the 
laboratory, on Expendable Launch Vehicles, the Space Shuttle, the ISS, a Small Scale Depot, or a Full Scale Depot. 
Laboratory testing can use sub- or full-scale tank sets for tests carried out on components, subsystems, and inte-
grated systems on the ground. Identified improvements can be incorporated into subsequent tank sets, which may be 
used on the ground or in orbital tests. In some cases, a “proto-flight” approach may be used, where the original 
ground-test tank set can potentially be modified for subsequent testing on-orbit. For example, test requirements may 
be addressed by building a subscale experiment, which simulates the hydrogen fluid systems of the storage facility, 
evaluating their performance in a vacuum chamber, and then demonstrating micro-g fluid transfer by performing an 
orbital experiment. 

H3.07 Space Nuclear Power For Human Missions 
Lead Center: GRC
Participating Center(s): MSFC 

Space Nuclear Power 
NASA is interested in the development of highly advanced systems, subsystems and components for use with both 
nuclear reactors and radioisotopes for future robotic and manned missions. Principally, these systems of interest are 
non-nuclear; however, they may operate in close proximity to nuclear sources. Anticipated power levels range from 
100’s of watts to multi-megawatts. Applications include: in-space primary propulsion, vehicle housekeeping, and 
science payloads, and on planetary surfaces; surface and atmospheric mobility, science stations, resource production, 
outposts and bases. Major technologies being pursued are:

? High efficiency power conversion > 20 percent, 2 kWe to MWe 
? Low mass thermal management (radiators) < 6 kg/m2 
? Electrical power management, control and distribution. > 1000 V, kWe to MWe 

Supporting technology includes: 

? High temperature materials/coatings > 1300 K 
? Deployment systems Large radiators, surface mobility, 
? Systems to mitigate planetary surface environments. (Dust, wind, planetary atmospheres, CO2, etc.) 

In addition to overall system mass, volume and cost reductions, safety and reliability are of extreme importance. It is 
envisioned that these technologies will be used on robotic and eventually human missions, and it is to the Agency’s 
advantage to develop those technologies that transcend the robotic and human mission set with a minimum or re-
design. Technologies that enable challenging missions such as bimodal nuclear thermal propulsion, high power 
nuclear electric propulsion and high power surface power are of particular interest. Technologies that are easily and 
efficiently scaled in power output and can be used in a host of applications (high commonality) are desired. 


H4 Habitation and Bioastronautics 

Technologies developed under this Topic are needed for the Advanced Human Support Technology Program (and 
other programs) to assure robust and reliable capabilities to support health and safety of human explorers during 
long-duration space missions. In addition, it is the goal of this topic to drive down the cost of human exploration 
missions and campaigns beyond Earth orbit and to develop and demonstrate critically needed capabilities for human 
activities in space. Some selected objectives of this topic include: (1) Developing innovative, affordable and highly 
operable new technologies for extra-vehicular activity (EVA) systems and advanced space habitation systems, and 
(2) Establishing a foundation for profitable commercial development of space applications of these technologies in 
the mid- to far-term. 

H4.01 Extravehicular Activity Productivity 
Lead Center: JSC 
Participating Center(s): None

Advanced extravehicular activity (EVA) systems are necessary for the successful human exploration of all destina-
tions beyond low Earth orbit. Complex missions to the Moon, Mars, L2, and other remote sites require innovative 
approaches for maximizing human productivity and for providing the capability to perform useful work tasks. Re-
quirements include reduction of system hardware weight and volume; increased hardware reliability, durability, and 
operating lifetime (before resupply, recharge and maintenance, or replacement is necessary); reduced hardware and 
software costs; increased human comfort; and less-restrictive work performance capability in the space environment, 
in hazardous ground-level contaminated atmospheres, or in extreme ambient thermal environments. All proposed 
Phase I research must lead to specific Phase II experimental development that could be integrated into a functional 
EVA system. Areas in which innovations are solicited include the following: 

Environmental Protection 
? Passive and active radiation protection technologies that protect the suited crewmember from radiation particles. 
? Dust and abrasion protection materials to exclude dust and withstand abrasion. 

EVA Mobility 
? Nonmetallic low profile space suit bearings that maximize rotation and mobility and are also lightweight and 
low cost. 

Life Support System 
? High-capacity oxygen storage, supply and recharge systems for normal and emergency supply of oxygen for 
breathing. 
? Low-venting or non-venting regenerable individual life support subsystem(s) concepts for crewmember cooling, 
heat rejection, and removal of expired water vapor and carbon dioxide. 
? Fuel cell technology that can provide compact high-energy power to a space suit. 
? Convection and freezable radiators that will be low cost and weight for thermal control. 
? Space water membrane evaporators for a space suit. 
? Variable conductance flexible external suit garment that can function as a radiator for high metabolic loads and 
as an insulator for low metabolic loads. 
? Extremely thermal conductive fibers or other alternatives to water-cooling loop tubing.

Sensors/Communications/Cameras 
? Space suit mounted displays for use both inside and outside of the spacesuit.  Outside mounted displays must be 
low profile and compatible with space environment.  Internal displays must be 100 percent O2 safe, unobtrusive 
and ultimately project onto the helmet visor. 
? IR camera that displays temperature of environment for safe handling of objects, geology science support and 
are integratible onto a spacesuit or rover. 
Integration 
? Robotics and display interface software that permit autonomous voice control via suited EVA crew. 
? Minimum gas loss and low power airlock providing quick exit and entry, and can accommodate an incapaci-
tated crewmember. 
? Light weight, non-metallic; environmentally harden manual or powered tools for driving fasteners.
? Innovative self-locking, multi-use captive fasteners. Tether hooks for equipment or crewmembers. 
? Low profile, low power and flexible body/limb mobility sensors, signal conditioners and software for immedi-
ate data analysis display.  Will be used internally or externally for space suit garment quantitative mobility 
testing.

H4.02 Advanced Habitation Systems 
Lead Center: JSC 
Participating Center(s): None

Advanced habitation technology is sought to enable Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise 
future orbital, planetary and deep space applications. Space and planetary habitation, pressure structures and unpres-
surized shelters are being sought out to provide innovative structural solutions that combine high strength and light 
weight materials along with the reliability, durability, reparability, radiation protection, packaging efficiency and 
life-cycle cost effectiveness. Advances in material developments and manufacturing techniques that enable the 
structure to "self-heal" and the emplacement, erection, deployment or manufacturing of habitats in space or on the 
Moon and Mars are considered enabling technologies for the evolution of humans into space and the eventual set-
tlement on Mars. Integration of sensors, circuitry and automated components to enable self-deployment and "smart" 
structures are considered necessary for the habitat to operate autonomously. The objective is to create an advanced 
habitat that becomes a "living" structure that not only runs autonomously, but also has self-healing capability. A 
number of technologies and techniques have been proposed that allow the delivery of deployable habitats to space 
and planet surfaces or the manufacturing and construction of habitats on planet surfaces. These include:

? Underground development of habitable structures that meet human space flight requirements. 
? Design, manufacturing and testing of inflatable structures that meet human space flight requirements. 
? Manufacturing in situ (Moon and Mars) structures for autonomously developing habitats that meet human space 
flight requirements. 
? Techniques for fully integrated skin and sensors/circuitry that enables "smart" structures that autonomously 
detect, analyze, and correct (repair) structural failure. 
? Integrating miniaturization technology into the habitat skin, thus reducing weight and increasing self-autonomy. 

Quantitative assessments require innovative, space flight compatible habitat structures that meet the needs for hu-
man space flight and structural integrity. The Moon and Mars are of the most interest. Consideration of flight-testing 
in space or at the Moon should be considered. Areas in which innovations are solicited include the following tech-
nologies for use in space (zero gravity) and/or the planetary surfaces: 

Habitat Structures 
? Advanced metal alloy structures 
? Advanced composite structures 
? Advanced inflatable structures 
? Advanced planetary in situ derived structures 

External Environment Protection 
? Radiation 
? Micrometeroid / Orbital Debris / Blast Ejecta 
? Vibration and Noise 
? UV, AO, Thermal 
? Dust, chemical contamination, self-healing 



Integrated Habitation Systems 
? Smart Habitats 
? Integrated Detection, Monitoring and Control 
? Internal Systems and Outfitting 
? Advanced Habitat Evolution 

Logistics, Maintenance and Repair 
? Logistics Supply, Storage and Recycling 
? Automated Servicing and Repair 
? Contamination Control and Housekeeping 


H5 Space Assembly, Inspection and Maintenance 

One goal of the space assembly, inspection and maintenance topic is to enable a much more robust set of options for 
affordable implementation of ambitious new modular space exploration systems and missions. Another goal is to 
drive down the cost of human exploration missions and campaigns beyond low Earth orbit. Objectives. The objec-
tives of this topic include the following:  (1) Developing and validating technologies for the space assembly of large 
systems -- including both science mission systems (e.g., observatories) and human operational systems. (2) Enabling 
autonomous and/or tele-presence systems inspection.  (3) Advancing remote or shared control of these capabilities 
in near-Earth and interplanetary space.     (4) Developing and validating the capability to extend the life and reduce 
the costs if a new generation of space systems through repair, refueling, upgrades and re-use of components from 
one system to another. (5) Minimizing the impact of space system failures by enabling easy access for repair -- thus 
reducing system-level functional redundancy (and associated costs). (6) Enabling a reduction in the total mass 
launched to orbit for given mission architectures. (7) Establishing a foundation for profitable commercial develop-
ment of space applications of these technologies in the mid- to far-term 

H5.01 Automated Rendezvous, Docking and Capture 
Lead Center: JSC
Participating Center(s): GSFC, MSFC 

In support of future robotic and human missions beyond low Earth orbit, the need for automated rendezvous and 
docking has been identified. This subtopic addresses hardware and software technologies necessary to develop a 
robust automated guidance, navigation, and control (GN&C) capability bringing together two vehicles from initially 
large distances (> 1000 kilometers) around a remote planet and docking them. The “target” vehicle may be orbiting 
the planet for several years prior to the rendezvous. The “chaser” vehicle may begin the rendezvous after completing 
orbital insertion from an interplanetary cruise phase or after launching from the surface of the planet. 

Because of intended use for future human missions, the rendezvous and docking capability must be low risk ensur-
ing a very high level of mission success. The proposed system should be modular and adaptable to smaller robotic 
missions in order to validate the technology and spread the investment and experience base. 

Innovations are sought to solve the following technology challenges: 

? Spacecraft self-determination of orbits around remote astronomical bodies (including the Moon and Mars at a 
minimum) and supporting the initial phase of rendezvous operations when spacecraft to spacecraft ranges are 
possibly very large. Innovative technologies may include ground terrain tracking methodologies or possibly de-
ployment of land based or orbiting nav and communication aids when cost effective or necessary. Alternative 
strategies are additionally sought. 
? A minimum relative navigation sensor suite addressing spacecraft-to-spacecraft ranges of 100 kilometers 
through docking including relative attitude control during the final 100 meters of the approach. 




H5.02 Robotics Assistance, Assembly, Maintenance, and Servicing 
Lead Center: JSC
Participating Center(s): KSC 

Proposals are solicited for innovative concepts that improve robotic capabilities as well as the human’s ability to 
interact with and control robotic systems while minimizing the workload to EVA and IVA astronauts as well as 
ground operators. 

Robotic Manipulators, End-Effectors, and Joints 
Proposals are sought which include improvements to robotic joints, actuators, end-effectors, tools, and mechanisms. 
Proposals should address issues associated with space compatibility. Specific areas of interest include the following: 

Technologies or systems that provide a reduction to the weight and or volume of robotic systems such as: 

? Reduced scale high power-to-weight ratio actuators including but not limited to magnestostrictive motors and 
synthetic muscles 
? Miniaturized actuator control and drive electronics 
? Miniaturized sensing systems for manipulator position, rate, acceleration, force and torque 

Robotic systems that accommodate existing EVA tools including but not limited to anthropomorphic systems and 
multi-fingered dexterous end-effectors. 

Planetary robotic mobility systems and devices; robots will be needed to work with and to transport humans and 
equipment on a planetary surface. Examples include novel rover drive systems, suspension systems, and manipulator 
systems. 

Compact low power devices for site setup, operation, and planetary surface exploration. Novel mechanisms are 
needed to enable human exploration and habitation of planetary bodies. Examples include site clearing and setup 
devices, equipment deployment devices, sample collection and manipulation devices, and the actuation components 
for these devices. 

Human/Robotic Interface 
Proposals that improve operator efficiency via advanced displays, controls and telepresence interfaces and improve 
the ability of humans and computers to seamlessly control robotic systems are sought. Specific technology require-
ments include the following: 

? Tactile feedback devices that provide operator awareness of contact between work space objects and the robot 
structure. Key aspects of this technology are ergonomics and safety. 
? Force feedback devices that provide operator awareness of manipulator and payload inertia, gripping force, and 
forces and moments due to contact with external objects. Key aspects of this technology are ergonomics and 
safety. 
? Stereographic display systems that provide high-fidelity depth perception, field of view, and high resolution. 
? Tracking position and orientation of user appendages (i.e., head, arms, fingers, eyes) for the purpose of provid-
ing motion commands to the robot. Key aspects of this technology are to free the operator of any exoskeletons 
or devices attached to the body which impede or restrict the operator’s movements. 
? Innovative miniaturized display hardware for use with Helmet Mounted Display (HMD) systems that project 
data in a Head Up Display (HUD) format. Emphasis is placed on compact, low mass hardware that can be used 
with HMD displays and efficiently display data (graphical and alphanumeric) without detracting from the HMD 
displayed video. 

Intelligent Autonomous Systems 
? Artificial intelligence based systems and architectures with provision for crew oversight. 

Proposals are solicited for innovative concepts which will increase the functionality and robustness of extravehicular 
robotic (EVR) systems for science and operations. One example of such a robot is an EVA Robotic Assistant for 
planetary surface exploration. This robot should be able to follow a geologist, carry his tools and samples, provide 
video documentation of his activities plus real-time video for remote viewing and be commandable via a combina-
tion of gesture/voice by the geologist. Innovative concepts in machine vision, as well as in other non-vision forms of 
sensing and perception, which can provide the necessary input for the robotic system to function under a wide  
variety of operating conditions are required. Some specific technology needs to enable this EVA Robotic Assistant 
are: 

? Small, low power machine vision systems for tracking a moving, articulated object such as a geologist explor-
ing a planetary surface on foot. The tracker should not encumber the geologist by requiring him to wear special 
targets or beacons. 
? Aided dead-reckoning and landmark navigation to keep a record, referenced to the terrain, of where the geolo-
gist is now and where he has been. Systems which do not require emplacement of external beacons are needed. 
? Machine vision techniques for real-time image registration to create mosaics suitable for human viewing are 
needed. Mosaic construction must take into account camera motion and changes in lighting over extended peri-
ods of either several hours of EVA activity or a subsequent return to a previously visited location. This is 
intended to let the crew back in the habitat see what the geologist sees or to look around as if they were there. 

Another example of an EVR is a mobile, remotely controlled video camera platform capable of transmitting video to 
its operator. For planetary surface exploration, this could be a scout intended to locate sites for follow-up EVA. For 
in-space operations, this could be an AERCam used to provide video views of the exterior of the International Space 
Station or a future Space Solar Power Satellite to inspect for damage, plan or supervise repair work, etc. Specific 
technology needs include: 

? Supervised and traded control systems which allow for seamless human/robot interaction. The ability to ac-
commodate both planned and unplanned human and autonomous operations within a task is essential. 
? Model based landmark navigation to allow a mobile camera platform to find its way around the outside of a 
large satellite without requiring the addition of expensive external beacons including the ability to update the 
model of the satellite exterior as it changes. 
? Machine vision techniques, including the construction of image mosaics, for detection of unspecified changes in 
objects being inspected under changing lighting and viewing conditions. 
? Virtual reality interfaces that make it practical to operate such a robotic camera platform in close proximity to a 
large satellite when the operator has the view from the camera platform but no views of the platform. 


H6 Human Exploration and Expeditions 

The goals of this topic include: working collaboratively with technology developments in Space Science (and other 
organizations) to enable future human exploration missions to effectively address -- and at a fundamental level -- the 
"grand" science challenges facing NASA, driving down the cost of human exploration missions and campaigns 
beyond Earth orbit, and sharing the experience of exploration with the public. In pursuing these goals, the objectives 
under this topic include:  1) Developing and validating the capability for human explorers to gain deep lunar and 
planetary sub-surface knowledge and access -- both remotely and through sampling -- ranging down to 1000s of 
meters. 2) Enabling safe and affordable human exploration of other planetary surfaces -- locally but over global 
distances involving traverses of up to 1000s of kilometers.  3) Integrating and validating the technologies needed to 
revolutionize public engagement in "virtual exploration" -- ranging from higher rate communications, to the creation 
of virtual reality simulations, to innovative human-machine interfaces. 4) Establishing a foundation for profitable 
commercial development of space applications of these technologies in the mid- to far-term.

H6.01 Automated Exploration Applications of Intelligent Systems 
Lead Center: ARC
Participating Center(s): JSC, MSFC 

NASA is planning to fill space with robotic explorers, carrying our intelligence and our curiosity outward in ways 
never before possible. To survive decades of operation, these remote agents need to be smart, adaptable, curious, 
wary, and self-reliant in harsh and unpredictable environments. NASA is soliciting research in automated reasoning 
for autonomous systems that will enable the design, construction and operation of a new generation of remote agents 
that perform progressively more exploration at much lower cost than traditional approaches. NASA also needs 
automated reasoning to improve its operations closer to home. For instance, software is needed for monitoring shut-
tle and space station systems and diagnosing faults when they occur or software agents for processing, classifying 
and archiving the mountains of data from Earth orbiting satellites. Specific areas of interest for automated reasoning 
include the following: 

Agent Architectures 
? Autonomy architectures that support plug and play of automated reasoning components 
? Architectures for homogeneous and heterogeneous distributed systems of agents Capabilities related to 
Autonomous Performance 
? Planning and scheduling systems that support planning concurrent with execution, plan optimization, resource 
management and/or distributed plan creation capabilities 
? Model-based and statistical methods for monitoring, command confirmation, fault isolation, and diagnosis from 
sensor information 
? Methods for robust recovery and repair 
? Algorithms for real-time deduction and search 
? Novel environment sensing or mapping capabilities 
? Machine learning and adaptive control technologies 
? Methods for precisely and dynamically adjusting the level of human control 

Capabilities Related to Design 
? Declarative specification of software and hardware behaviors, collaborative environments for large scale model 
building 
? Methods for code synthesis and controller generation from declarative specifications 
? Automated generation of test sequences from component models and analytic verification methods, including 
model checking and theorem proving 
? Methods for modeling, code synthesis, simulation, testing and validation, as above, that operate from hybrid 
discrete/continuous models 

H6.02 Flight/Ground Operations and Crew Training 
Lead Center: JSC
Participating Center(s): MSFC 

Dramatic improvements will be needed in crew and ground operations performance and productivity as NASA 
develops new operational capabilities to support multiple, manned missions and long duration and long distance 
missions. Robotic, vehicle and support systems will be required to be more robust, autonomous and intelligent as 
well as more maintainable. These capabilities will allow operators to "buy time" by increasing system mean time 
between failures, predicting when intervention will be needed, managing degraded operations, and using functional 
redundancy. Advanced capabilities for information, data analysis, presentation, onboard planning, execution and 
fault management will be needed to assist the crew. Sophisticated training, maintenance support systems and a 
robust knowledge base will be needed onboard, and will need to be well integrated with increasingly advanced 
control and maintenance systems. Ground support operations will need to be redesigned to support the increasing 
autonomy of space systems and onboard crew. There will need to be advanced support for distributed and adjustable 
command responsibility and distributed and flexible training. Significantly, more productive and intuitive ap-
proaches are needed for updating, adapting, testing and certifying advanced distributed operations software and 
knowledge bases during missions. Specific areas of interest in the areas of crew training and in flight and ground 
operations include: 

Crew Training and Maintenance Support Systems 
? Flexible training and tutoring systems for mission operations support including distributed cooperative training, 
virtual reality training, intelligent computer-based training, and authoring tools 
? Integration of training with advanced control and maintenance systems 
? Tools to collect/capture and tailor design-time information for use in developing training materials 
? Procedures or technology for evaluating effectiveness of innovative training methods 
? Data Management, Data Analysis, and Presentation and Human Interaction 
? Methods for selecting and summarizing vehicle systems and payload data relating to status and events to sup-
port crew and ground awareness, operational decision-making, and management by exception and opportunity 
rather than by continuous or scheduled monitoring 
? Human interaction methods for collaboration, cooperation and supervision of intelligent semi-autonomous 
systems 
? Goal-driven collaborative data analysis systems capable of adaptation and learning 
? Simple systems for notification and coordination including natural language interfaces 
? Immersive environments: real-time environments to enhance a human operator's ability to interact with large 
quantities of complex data, especially at distant locations 
? Intelligent data analysis techniques: capabilities to interpret, explain, explore, and classify large quantities of 
heterogeneous data 

Robust Planning, Operations, Fault Detection, and Recovery with Distributed Adjustable Command Respon-
sibility 
? Onboard planning, sequencing, monitoring, and re-planning of activities including systems and crew activities 
? Flexible management of the actions of subsystems within the larger context of system flight rules and con-
straints 
? Flexible and robust fault management approaches that use system models, "buy time" for human intervention 
and maintenance, and learn from human operators during and after the interventions 
? Approaches to distributed and adjustable command responsibilities among systems, crew and ground 
? Model-based continuous estimation of the likelihood of critical events, including human errors, to provide 
warnings of potential events and their consequences and to suggest appropriate countermeasures 
? Integration of systems for fault management, maintenance and training 
? Operations knowledge management and software updating 
? Systems and processes for crew and ground operators to quickly and effectively define, update, test and certify 
operational knowledge and rule bases before and during missions designed for reuse in autonomous systems 
and in training 
? Tools for incorporating and using engineering data and specifications (about equipment and its operating modes 
and failures and about operations procedures) into operations knowledge and model-based autonomous systems 
? Tools and environments to support modification and validation of knowledge bases (models of activities, 
equipment and environment) in intelligent autonomous software by operators to capture methods and knowl-
edge used by operators during interventions and to collaboratively adapt to unanticipated circumstances 
? Simulation environments and tools for use in designing and testing intelligent semi-autonomous systems 


H7 Space Transportation 

The goal of the HEDS Space Transportation topic is to identify and to develop specific new space transportation 
technologies that can significantly increase the safety and reliability of ambitious, future human exploration mis-
sions and campaigns beyond Earth orbit while dramatically reducing the transportation-related cost of human 
exploration initial missions and sustained campaigns. This includes both systems and infrastructures associated with 
Earth-to-orbit transportation, in-space transport, and excursions from space to and from targets in space (including 
the Moon, Mars and asteroids). The objectives under this topic include: (1) Developing and demonstrating selected, 
highly innovative technologies needed to assure that future human exploration space transportation systems and 
infrastructures are safe and "robustly" reliable. (2) Developing and validating technologies for the affordable trans-
portation to - and from - targets in space beyond low Earth orbit. (3) Enabling reliable and affordable transportation 
to all points of interest globally on the Moon or Mars. (4) Establishing a foundation for profitable commercial de-
velopment of space applications of these technologies in the mid- to far-term.





H7.01 Test and Validation Management Methodologies 
Lead Center: SSC 
Participating Center(s): None

Proposals are solicited for innovative methods and approaches to management of test and validation of space trans-
portation technologies. Proposals should address methods of providing more cost efficient, effective identification 
and use of test and validation facilities or the development of key test and validation technologies that can improve 
reliability and performance of test and validation facilities and operations. Specific areas of interest in this subtopic 
include the following: 

Application of System Science to Management of Test and Validation 
New innovative technologies and approaches to incorporating knowledge and information processing techniques 
(intelligent systems, data mining techniques, fuzzy logic, neural nets, optimization techniques, etc.) to support deci-
sion making for test and validation management. 

? Data mining and optimization techniques that will provide identification and analysis of test and validation 
facilities for selection of the best facility.
? Modeling and analysis methods to identify and evaluate technical areas required to be developed or modified to 
provide effective testing and validation of space transportation technology. 
? Modeling and analysis methods to identify and assess areas for improving test efficiencies and/or reducing 
operational costs for the test and validation of the technology.
? Techniques to reduce required sample size to maintain acceptable levels of confidence in cost data. 
? Risk management techniques. 

Methods for Improvements in Test and Validation Operations, Safety and Reliability 
Identification and development of specific technologies that will provide improved effectiveness and efficiency in 
the operation, safety, and reliability in all test and validation programs. 

? Software and hardware systems that create a virtual test and control system to monitor operations and data 
analysis. This virtual control system would incorporate expert base and information processing techniques that 
provide for real time interactive decision making. 
? Graphical data software to provide a near real time data translation into 2-D or 3-D graphic display that pro-
vides a visual representation of the physical characteristics of the data, facilitating the data analysis. 
? Interface hardware and software that provide for Network Appliance technology to be applied to test operations. 
? Develop design concepts for optimized, and/or modularized, test and validation facilities which will improve 
test efficiency and reduce transition time between test articles. 

H7.02 High Power Electric Propulsion For Human Missions 
Lead Center: GRC 
Participating Center(s): None

High-power (> 100 kW), electric propulsion technologies are a critical component of orbit transfer and planetary 
insertion in the HEDS missions. High-power electric propulsion can reduce propellant mass requirements (compared 
to all-chemical propulsion) to the extent where it allows a reduction in launch vehicle class or an increase in pay-
load. In either case, the mass savings result in significant cost savings for HEDS missions. For interplanetary 
missions, high-power electric propulsion will provide quicker trip times (depending on available power) than all-
chemical propulsion since its high specific impulse (Isp) allows for direct transit to planetary bodies. 

Innovations in high-power electric propulsion technology are sought that will increase high-power electric thruster 
efficiency, increase thruster life, reduce total system mass, reduce system complexity, and reduce trip time. Thruster 
parameters of interest include power levels of 100-kW to several megawatts; Isp values of 2000 s for Earth-orbit 
transfers to over 5000 s for planetary missions; thruster efficiencies in excess of 50 percent; and system lifetimes 
commensurate with mission requirements (typically 10,000 hours of operation). Proposals that seek to investigate 
and resolve, either theoretically or experimentally, the fundamental lifetime and performance limiting mechanisms 
of high-power electric thrusters are of particular interest. 
Several propulsion devices are being considered for high-power HEDS missions including Hall, Ion, magnetoplas-
madynamic (MPD) thrusters, pulsed inductive thrusters (PIT), and VASMIR. The specific technology challenges for 
high-power propulsion devices include: 

Hall and Ion 
? Scaled up in power (100 kW class) 
? Use of alternate propellants such as krypton or argon 
? Maintain high efficiency of today's lower power systems (> 55 to 70 percent efficient) 
? Long lifetimes (> 10,000 hours) 

MPD 
? Long lifetime components > 10,000 hours 
? Improved efficiency (> 60 percent) 
? Simpler, higher efficient, continuous (not pulsed) power processing systems (> 90 percent) 
? Lighter thermal control (most of the inefficiency results in waste heat not removed by the exhaust, e.g., almost 
400 kW of heat must be removed for a 1 MW MPD) (< 2 kg/kWt) 

Pulsed Inductive Thrusters 
? High efficiency > 60 percent 
? Simple, efficient and light pulsed power processing systems (> 90 percent, < 1 kg/kW) 

VASMIR 
? High efficiency stages and processes (total efficiency > 60 percent) 
? Light components including superconducting magnets 
? Advanced, long-term fuel storage (e.g., hydrogen and helium) [years on-orbit, < 20 percent tankage] 

Specific Impulse Throttling 
? Techniques to allow for throttling of Isp at constant power (~2500 sec to 10,000 sec) 
? Other innovative propulsion concepts providing the above Isp's, > 60 percent efficiency, at power levels from 
100 kW to multi-megawatts 

Support Systems 
? Light, inexpensive, throttleable propellant feed systems for various fuels 
? Radiation-resistant components to resist cosmic and power system radiation 
? Safety and redundant systems to ensure crew member safety and mission success 
? Gimbaling systems: (2DOF > +/- 20o)


8.1.5 SPACE SCIENCE

The space science technology development program develops and makes available new space technologies needed 
to enable and enhance exploration, expand our knowledge of the universe, and ensure continued national scientific, 
technical, and economic leadership. It strives to improve reliability and mission safety, and to accelerate mission 
development. Since the early 1990s, the average space science mission development time has been reduced from 
over nine years to five years or less, partly by integration and early infusion of advanced technologies into missions. 
For missions planned through 2004, we hope to further reduce development time to less than four years. Our tech-
nology program encompasses three primary goals.   First, we develop new and better technical approaches and 
capabilities. Then we validate these capabilities, in space where necessary, so that they can be confidently applied to 
space science flight projects.  Finally, we apply these improved and demonstrated capabilities in the space science 
programs and transfer them to U.S. industry for public use through programs such as the Small Business Innovation 
Research Program. For more information on space science at NASA, see http://spacescience.nasa.gov/strategy/2000/

S1 SUN EARTH CONNECTION	118
S1.01 Particles and Fields Measurements for Missions to the Heliosphere, Planetary Magnetospheres and
             Upper Atmospheres	118
S1.02 Solar Sails	119
S1.03 Multifunctional Structure and Sensor Systems	119
S1.04 Spacecraft Technology for Micro/Nanosats	120
S1.05 Spacecraft and Space Environment Interaction	121
S1.06 UV and EUV Optics and Detectors	121
S2 STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF THE UNIVERSE	122
S2.01 Sensors and Detectors for Astrophysics	123
S2.02 Terrestrial and Extra-Terrestrial Balloons and Aerobots	123
S2.03 Multiple Coordinated Observatories	124
S2.04 Thermal Control and Management	125
S2.05 Optical Technologies	125
S2.06 Advanced Photon Detectors	127
S3 ASTRONOMICAL SEARCH FOR ORIGINS	128
S3.01 Ultralight Adaptive Large Telescope Systems	129
S3.02 Precision Constellations for Interferometry	129
S3.03 Astronomical Instrumentation	130
S3.04 Astrobiology	131
S3.05 High Contrast Astrophysical Imaging	133
S4 EXPLORATION OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM	133
S4.01 Science Instruments for Conducting Solar System Exploration	133
S4.02 Planetary Mobility and Robotics, Sub-Surface Access, and Autonomous Control Technologies	135
S4.03 Detection and Reduction of Biological Contamination on Flight Hardware	135
S4.04 Lightweight Materials for Planetary Aerocapture, and Spacecraft Structures and Deployables	136
S4.05 Advanced Miniature and Micro Avionics and Electronics for Deep Space Systems	136
S4.06 Telecommunications Tech. for High Rate Transmission over Large Distances and Local Planetary  
Networks	137
S4.07 Deep Space Power and Propulsion Systems	138


S1 Sun Earth Connection 

The goal of the Sun-Earth Connection (SEC) Theme in the Space Science Enterprise is an understanding of the 
changing Sun and its effects on the Solar System, life, and society. SEC’s strategy for understanding this interactive 
system is organized around four fundamental quests designed to answer the following questions: 1) Why does the 
sun vary? 2) How do the planets respond to solar variations? 3) How do the sun and galaxy interact? 4) How does 
solar variability affect life and society? SEC’s challenging science program involves:  1) Seeking breakthroughs in 
understanding by making measurements from new vantage points within and outside the Solar System. 2) Making 
simultaneous, system-wide measurements with constellations of spacecraft that resolve existing space-time ambi-
guities. 3) Applying new scientific knowledge strategically to produce direct and immediate benefits to our 
increasingly space-dependent society.

S1.01 Particles and Fields Measurements for Missions to the Heliosphere, Planetary Magnetospheres and 
Upper Atmospheres 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): JPL 

The Sun-Earth Connection theme studies the Sun with its surrounding heliosphere carrying its photon and particle 
emissions and the subsequent responses of the Earth and planets. This requires remote and in situ sensing of upper 
atmospheres and ionospheres, magnetospheres and interfaces with the solar wind, the heliosphere, and the Sun. 
Improving our knowledge and understanding of these questions requires accurate in situ measurements of the com-
position, flow, and thermodynamic state of space plasmas and their interactions with atmospheres as well as the 
physics and chemistry of the upper atmosphere/ ionosphere systems. Remote sensing of photons and neutral atoms 
are required for the physics and chemistry of the Sun, the heliosphere, magnetospheres, and planetary atmospheres 
and ionospheres. Photon measurements are covered under other subtopics (e.g., S1.06, S2.01, and E1.01). Since 
instrumentation is severely constrained by spacecraft resources, miniaturization, low power consumption and auton-
omy are common technological challenges across this entire category of sensors. Specific technologies are sought in 
the following categories:

Plasma Remote Sensing (e.g., neutral atom cameras) 
? Advanced neutral atom imagers for energies from a few eV to 100 keV to remotely sense ion populations in the 
heliosphere and in the magnetospheres of the planets. This may involve techniques for high-efficiency and ro-
bust imaging of energetic neutral atoms covering any part of the energy spectrum from 1 eV to 100 keV. 

In Situ Plasma Sensors 
? Improved techniques for imaging of charged particle (electrons and ions) velocity distributions. 
? Improved techniques for the regulation of spacecraft floating potential near the local plasma potential, with 
minimal impacts on the ambient plasma and field environment.
? Low power digital time-of-flight analyzer chips and waveform generators with sub-nanosecond resolution and 
multiple channels of parallel processing.
? Miniaturized, radiation-tolerant, autonomous electronic systems for the above.

Fields Sensors 
? Improved techniques for measurement of plasma floating potential and DC electric field (and by extension the 
plasma drift velocity), especially in the direction parallel to the spin axis of a spinning spacecraft.
? Measurement of the gradient of the electric field in space around a single spacecraft or cluster of spacecraft.
? Improved techniques for the measurement of the gradients (curl) of the magnetic field in space local to a single 
spacecraft or group of spacecraft.
? Direct measurement of the local electric current density at spatial and time resolutions typical of space plasma 
structures such as shocks, magnetopauses, and auroral arcs.
? Miniaturized, radiation-tolerant and autonomous electronic systems for the above.

Electromagnetic Radiation Sensors 
? Radar sounding and echo imaging of plasma density and field structures from orbiting spacecraft. 

S1.02 Solar Sails 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): GSFC, LaRC, MSFC 

The objective of this subtopic is to stimulate breakthroughs in technologies associated with solar sails. Solar sails are 
envisioned as a low-cost, efficient transport system for future deep space missions. They are baselined for several 
strategic missions in the Sun-Earth Connection (SEC) Space Science theme, including Solar Polar Imager and Inter-
stellar Probe, the latter being a solar sail mission to explore interstellar space. Missions in the Exploration of the 
Solar System (ESS) theme would be broadly enhanced by the availability of proven, solar sail technology. Areas in 
which innovations are sought include lowering the cost of sail development and application, enhancing sail delivery 
performance, and reducing the risks associated with sail development and application. 

Technology innovations are sought in the following areas: packaging and deployment, materials, structure/systems, 
fabrication, system control (attitude, etc.), maneuver/navigation, operations, durability/survivability, and sail impact 
on science. 

Three parameters have been used as sail performance metrics in mission applications that imply levels of technology 
capability: sail size, sail survivability for close solar approaches, and areal density (ratio of mass of the sail to area of 
the sail). In addition, overall system metrics are cost, benefit, and risk. Technologies of interest should be geared 
toward a wide range of sail sizes, solar closest approach distances, and areal densities, and may be optimized for one 
portion of the range rather than trying to cover the whole range. Sail sizes may range from very small (meter-sized 
for use with tiny payloads or use as auxiliary propulsion), to medium (50-100 m size for achieving high-inclination 
solar orbits) and ultimately to the very large (hundreds of meters for leviated orbits, high delta V, and for use in 
leaving solar system at high speed). Closest solar approaches may range from 1 AU down to 0.1 AU. Areal densities 
for a solar sail subsystem (excluding payload) may range from 0.1 to 10 g/m2. 

S1.03 Multifunctional Structure and Sensor Systems 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): GSFC, LaRC 

NASA seeks innovative concepts for multifunctional or integrated structure and sensor/electronic systems to reduce 
spacecraft size and mass, and to enable lower-cost and more capable aerospace vehicles, instruments and structures. 
A multifunctional system combines several functions, which are usually performed by separate subsystems, into a 
single highly integrated system. Additionally, multifunctional systems would enable more effective health monitor-
ing where, in this case, "health monitoring" refers to the state of the spacecraft, subsystem or structure. To achieve 
this will require revolutionary advances over the capabilities of traditional spacecraft systems. Microspacecraft 
systems (as small as 10 kg, using 10 W, or less) of all varieties will enable new missions that are currently impracti-
cal. These systems will include, but are not limited to, orbiters, landers, atmospheric probes, rovers, penetrators, 
aerobots (balloons), planetary aircraft, subsurface vehicles (ice/soil), and submarines. Also of interest are distributed 
sensor systems integral with structural elements for the monitoring of the state of those elements or for the construc-
tion of new classes of scientific instruments based upon the unique features of the integrated system. New 
technologies are needed in the areas of integration and packaging of MEMS sensors and actuators integral with 
advanced lightweight materials for structure and propulsion or thermal control. 

Potential mission applications for the technology products developed in this area include micro/nano-spacecraft, 
thin-film gossamer spacecraft, adaptive large-aperture telescopes, antennas, and airframes. High-priority technology 
development needs are:

? Techniques for the structural integration of low-volume electronics packaging such as chip-on-structure, chip-
on-flex (flexible substrate), and imbedded electronics.
? Concepts for integrating electronics, MEMS, power distribution, energy storage, thermal management, and 
radiation shielding with ultra-lightweight composite structures.
? Multifunctional membranes that incorporate thin-film electronics and MEMS sensors, photovoltaic cells, or 
electrochromic materials.
? Adaptive and reconfigurable structures that can respond reactively to environmental stimuli for self-repair of 
damage.
? Avionics, including highly integrated "systems-on-a-chip" technologies that integrate areas such as telecommu-
nications, power management, data processing and storage, on-chip energy storage, on-chip magnetics or data 
sensors with structure and/or actuators.
? Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) including: microactuation, navigation sensors, health-monitor 
sensor systems, low power and low-mass on-chip communication systems, and micro fluid storage and control 
systems.
? Thermal management, including active and passive techniques.
? Integration of functions such as engineering sensors and science instruments, structure, thermal, cabling, pro-
pulsion, etc.
? Technology for integrating three-dimensional VLSI, chip stacking, multi-chip-module stacking and other  
advanced packaging techniques with structural elements.
? Concepts and designs for test and validation of design integrity and performance of IP based ASICs, mixed 
signal ASICs and MEMS.

S1.04 Spacecraft Technology for Micro/Nanosats 
Lead Center: GSFC 
Participating Center(s): None

NASA seeks research & development of components, subsystems and systems that enable inexpensive, highly 
capable small spacecraft for future SEC missions. The proposed technology must be compatible with spacecraft 
somewhere within the Micro/Nano range from 100 kg down to 1 kg. All proposed technology must have a potential 
for providing a function at current performance levels with significantly reduced mass, power, and cost, or, have a 
potential for significant increase in performance without additional mass, power and cost. These reduction and/or 
improvement factors should be significant and show a minimum factor of 2 (relative to the state of the art in 2000) 
with a goal of 10 or higher. 

A proposed technology must state the type or types of expected improvements, (performance, mass, power, cost), 
list the assumptions for current state of the art, and indicate the spacecraft range of sizes for which the technology is 
applicable. 

The integration of multiple components into functional units and subsystems is desirable but not a requirement for 
consideration.

? Avionics and architectures that support command and data handling functions, including input/output, format-
ting, encoding, processing, storage, and A to D conversion. System level architecture, software operating 
systems, low voltage logic switching, radiation-tolerant design and packaging techniques are also appropriate 
technologies for consideration. 
? Sensors and actuators that support guidance, navigation, and control functions such as sun/earth sensors, star 
trackers, inertial reference units, navigation receivers, magnetometers, reaction wheels, magnetic torquers, and 
attitude thrusters. Technologies with applications to either spinning or three-axis stable spacecraft are sought. 
? Power system elements including those that support the generation, storage, conversion, distribution, regulation, 
isolation, and switching functions for spacecraft power. System level architecture, low voltage buss design, ra-
diation tolerant design and novel packaging techniques are appropriate technologies for consideration. 
? New and novel application of technologies for manufacturing, integration and test of micro/nano size spacecraft 
are sought. Limited production runs of up to several hundred spacecraft can be considered. Efficiencies can de-
rive from increased reliability, flexibility in the end-to-end production process as well as cost, labor and 
schedule. 
? Technologies that support passive and active thermal control suitable for micro and nano size spacecraft are 
sought. These functions include heat generation, storage, rejection, transport and the control of these functions. 
Efficient system level approaches for integrated small spacecraft that may see a wide range of thermal environ-
ments are desirable. These environments may range from low heliocentric orbits to two-hour shadows. 
? Elements that support earth-to-space or space-to-space communications functions are sought. This includes 
receivers, transmitters, transceivers, transponders, antennas, RF amplifiers and switches. S and X are the target 
communications bands. 
? Systems architectures and hardware that lead to greater spacecraft and constellation autonomy and therefore 
reduce operational expenses are desired. Technologies that derive added capability for a fixed bandwidth, effi-
cient utilization of ground systems, status analysis and situation control or other enhancing performance for 
operations are sought. 
? Structure and mechanism technologies and material applications that support the micro/nano class of spacecraft 
are desired. Exoskeleton structures, spin release mechanisms, and bi-stable deployment mechanisms are typical 
of the desired technology. 
? Propulsion system elements that provide delta-V capability for spinning and/or three axis stable spacecraft are 
sought. This includes solid, cold-gas and liquid systems and their components such as igniters, thrust vector 
control mechanisms, tanks, valves, nozzles, and system control functions.

S1.05 Spacecraft and Space Environment Interaction 
Lead Center: MSFC
Participating Center(s): GRC, GSFC, JPL 

This subtopic is concerned with the effects of ionizing radiation, electromagnetic fields, plasma and thermosphere, 
and thermal and solar components of the environment on spacecraft systems, materials, as well as aeronautics and 
ground-based technologies. Innovative systems, components, and engineering tools are sought that increase reliabil-
ity in the harsh environment of space, or that mitigate its effects. Materials sought include advanced thermal control 
coatings, multi-layer insulation materials, polymeric films, optical materials, seals, marker/astronaut visual aid 
coatings, and radiation shielding. Innovative engineering tools and models are sought that improve reliability and/or 
performance of avionic and ground-based systems.

New processing and application techniques are sought that reduce the cost or increase the performance reliability of 
current space-qualified materials and coatings. Low-cost, lightweight materials and protective coatings that mitigate 
environmental effects are also sought. 

Specific areas for which proposals are sought include: 

? Cost-effective methods for improving radiation tolerance of microelectronics and photonics including the re-
duction of single event upsets and other single particle-induced soft errors, and elimination of single event 
latchups and other single particle-induced destructive conditions.
? Cost-effective mitigation of radiation effects.
? Techniques for electrically grounding spacecraft to mitigate spacecraft charging. 
? Techniques for controlling spacecraft potentials actively or passively.
? Other methods to mitigate harmful effects of space plasma and spacecraft charging.
? Preventing or mitigating the effects of space plasma electrical discharges on solar arrays and surfaces. 
? Stable, electrically conductive but thermally advantageous coatings for spacecraft surfaces.
? Materials that electrically are partially insulating but that also “bleed off” buried charge.
? Flexible materials capable of withstanding ultraviolet and particulate radiation without embrittlement. 
? Development of design guidelines for missions closer than 1 AU to the sun.
? Advanced materials for fasteners, including thread, hook-and-loop fasteners, structural adhesives with minimal 
outgassing characteristics, and EVA tethers.
? Cost-effective methods for ground-based simulation of the natural space environment.
? Development of novel methods of increasing aeronautic crew safety and system performance against the propo-
gated effects of the natural space environment.
? Development of novel methods of increasing ground-based system performance and reliability from the propo-
gated effects of the natural space environment such as soft error issues or power grid array.
 
S1.06 UV and EUV Optics and Detectors 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): MSFC 

Remote imaging, spectroscopy, and polarimetry at ultraviolet (UV) and extreme ultraviolet (EUV) wavelengths are 
important tools for studying the Sun-Earth connection from the Sun's atmosphere to the Earth's aurora. A far ultra-
violet (FUV) range is sometimes interposed between UV and EUV, but the terminology is arbitrary: the pertinent 
full range of wavelength is approximately 20-300 nm. 

The proposal should explain specifically how it intends to advance the state of the art in one or more of the follow-
ing areas: 

Imaging Mirrors
? Large aperture: 1-4 m 
? Low mass: 5-20 kg m-2 
? Accurate figure: ~0.01 wave rms or better at 632 nm. Figure accuracy must be maintained through launch and 
on orbit (including for mirrors subjected to direct or concentrated solar radiation, the effects of differential  
heating)
? Low microroughness: ~1 nm rms or better on scales below 1 mm 

Optical Coatings and Transmission Filters 
? Coatings (filters) with improved reflectivity (transmission) and selectivity (narrow bands, broad bands, or 
edges). Technologies include (but are not limited to) multilayer coatings, transmission gratings, and Fabry-Pérot 
étalons. 

Diffraction Gratings 
? High groove density (> 4000 mm-1) for high spectral resolving power in conjunction with achievable focal 
lengths and pixel sizes 
? High efficiency and low scattter (microroughness) 
? Variable line spacing 
? Echelle gratings 
? Active gratings (replicated onto deformable surfaces) 

Detectors
? Large format (4K x 4K and larger) 
? High quantum efficiency 
? Small pixel size 
? Large well depth 
? Low read noise 
? Fast readout 
? Low power consumption (including readout) 
? Intrinsic energy and/or polarization discrimination (3d or 4d detector) 
? Active pixel sensors (back-illumination, UV sensitivity) 


S2 Structure and Evolution of the Universe 

The goal of the Space Science Enterprise's Structure and Evolution of the Universe (SEU) Theme is to seek the 
answer to three fundamental questions: (1) What is the Structure of the Universe and what is our Cosmic Destiny?   
(2) What are the cycles of matter and energy in the evolving Universe? (3) What are the ultimate limits of gravity 
and energy in the Universe? SEU’s strategy for understanding this interactive system is organized around four fun-
damental quests designed to pursue the following: (A) Identify dark matter and learn how it shapes galaxies and 
systems of galaxies, (B) Explore where and when chemicals elements where made, (C) Understand the cycles in 
which matter, energy and magnetic fields are exchanged between stars and the gas between stars, (D) Discover how 
gas flows in disks and how cosmic jets formed, (E) Identify the sources of gamma-ray bursts and high energy cos-
mic rays and F)Measure how strong gravity operates near black holes and how it affects the early universe. The 
technologies needed to achieve these goals fall into the following categories: (1) Detectors and sensors (2) Optical 
technologies (3) Long lived thermal control and cryogenic systems (4) Multiple coordinated observatories (5) Ad-
vanced detectors technologies (6) Ultra long duration terrestrial and extra-terrestrial balloons and aerobots 
technologies.
S2.01 Sensors and Detectors for Astrophysics 
Lead Center: JPL 
Participating Center(s): GSFC 

Space science sensor and detector technology innovations are sought in the following areas: 

Space VLBI
Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) systems with one element in space (called Space VLBI) need develop-
ment of space-borne, low-power, ultra-low-noise amplifiers (less than 5x the quantum limit at 43 GHz and 86 GHz) 
to serve as primary receiving instruments. Also needed are light-weight, deployable (up to 50-meters diameter), 
space-borne radio telescopes with high efficiency at millimeter-wave observing bands (up to 86 GHz) to serve as 
primary observing instruments. 

Far Infrared/Submillimeter
Future, space-based observatories in the 40 micron to 1 mm spectral regime will be cooled to cryogenic tempera-
tures, greatly reducing background noise from the telescope. In order to take advantage of this potentially huge gain 
in sensitivity, improved detectors and detector arrays are required. The goal is to provide noise equivalent power less 
than 10-20 W Hz-1/2 over most of the spectral range in a 100x100 pixel detector array, with low-power dissipation 
array readout electronics. The ideal detector element would count individual photons and provide some energy 
discrimination. For detailed line mapping (e.g., C+ at 158 micron), heterodyne arrays operating in the same fre-
quency range near the quantum limit are desirable. 

X-ray
Improvements in material growth techniques for solid state hard X-ray detectors.  Large format detectors for use 
with “lobster eye” X-ray optics.  Could be arrays of CCDs, silicon strip detectors, or gas micro-strip or micro-gap 
detectors, optimized for low energy X-ray operation in relatively low-rate environments.  Micro-well structures on 
amorphous thin film transistor arrays for two-dimensional pixel readout with fine pitch (few hundred microns) for 
large X-ray and gamma-ray area arrays (meters scale). 

S2.02 Terrestrial and Extra-Terrestrial Balloons and Aerobots 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): JPL, LaRC 

Innovations in materials, structures, and systems concepts have enabled buoyant vehicles to play an expanding role 
in NASA's Space and Earth Science Enterprises. A new generation of large, stratospheric balloons based on ad-
vanced balloon envelope technologies will be able to deliver payloads of several thousand kilograms to above 99.9 
percent of the Earth's absorbing atmosphere and maintain them there for months of continuous observation. Balloons 
will also carry scientific payloads on Mars, Venus, Titan, and the outer planets in order to investigate their atmos-
pheres in situ and their surfaces from close proximity. Their envelopes will be subject to extreme environments and 
must support missions with a range of durations. Robotic balloons, known as aerobots, have a wide range of poten-
tial applications both on Earth and on other solar system bodies. NASA is seeking innovative and cost effective 
technologies in support of terrestrial and extra-terrestrial balloons and aerobots in the following areas: 

Materials 
? Membranes for terrestrial applications having strengths in excess of 7600 N/m and areal densities less than 40 
g/m^2. Also desired are films, fibers, and innovative construction techniques that would lead to composite 
membranes achieving these strength and density goals. Additional material design considerations include resis-
tance to UV degradation, operating temperatures between 180K and 300K, resistance to fracture, resistance to 
creep, low helium permeability, low and absorptivity to emmisivity ratio, high toughness, and good handling, 
folding, and seaming characteristics. Material must be producible to lay flat for a width of at least 1.53 meters. 
? Membranes for extra terrestrial applications having yield strengths in excess of 150-200 MPa and areal densities 
less than 10-12 g/m^2. Also desired are films, fibers, and innovative construction techniques that would lead to 
composite membranes achieving these strength and density goals. For planetary applications, operating tem-
peratures of the membranes are 70-90K (Titan), 140-300K (Mars) and 250-750k (Venus). Cold, brittleness 
point of the membranes should be below the operating temperature range. 

Support systems 
? Trajectory control techniques for maneuvering terrestrial and extra-terrestrial aerobots both horizontally and 
vertically
? Low weight power systems for terrestrial balloons that produce 2 kW or more continuously
? Power systems that enable long duration, polar night missions
? Innovative, low cost, low power, low weight, precision pointing systems that permit arcsecond or better accu-
racy

Design and Fabrication 
? Efficient and cost-effective balloon envelope seaming, fabrication, and inspection techniques that lower costs 
and increase quality
? Innovative balloon design concepts that reduce material strength requirements, increase reliability, enhance 
performance, or improve mission flexibility

Deployment and inflation of planetary balloons 
? Low weight systems for controlled deployment of balloons during atmospheric descent with mitigation of 
deployment shocks for Mars applications 
? Low-weight high pressure tanks for gas storage 
? Automatic inflation and launch from the planetary surface 

S2.03 Multiple Coordinated Observatories 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): None 

A revolution is taking place in the way we conduct a range of space science missions. Specifically, the next decade 
will bring over 20 missions which involve formations of coordinated, observing platforms, or virtual platforms 
(VPs) in order to enable very long baseline imaging systems, high angular resolution interferometry, and complex 
communications networks to name a few. These distributed systems will operate under virtual infrastructures capa-
ble of responding to changing needs and conditions while evolving over time to introduce new capabilities. 
Representative mission scenarios include maintaining a specified satellite formation geometry at key points in the 
trajectory, maintaining the relative motion among co-orbiting spacecraft throughout the orbit, or maintaining relative 
positioning and attitude for targeting starts and other points distant in this or other solar system. Some of the more 
challenging scenarios involve the measurement of gravity waves and the imaging of black holes. These missions 
have relative measurement and/or control requirements on the order of nano- or even picometers, sometimes at tens, 
thousands, and even millions of kilometers apart. Frequently, these requirements go beyond the capability of current 
technology in the ability to sense and control position and orientation. Additionally, distributed spacecraft concepts 
of collective pointing and phasing of a number of observing systems relative to a target of interest or coordinated 
pointing (pointing the formation to collect related data from different selected angles) are critical to many of these 
mission scenarios. In addition to the dynamic behavior of each individual spacecraft, the collective behavior of all 
the spacecraft in the formation will determine the quality and the magnitude of the science return. 

The requirements for coordinating these platforms have necessitated a major change in how we analyze, design, 
operate, and maintain space-based observatories. In particular, in many cases, several of the spacecraft bus compo-
nents, which were at one time virtually decoupled from the payload or science sensor, are now fully integrated and 
fully coupled together operationally. This is the case for a wide range of interferometry missions where the inter-
ferometric measurements, which provide the primary science product, are the only measurements available at the 
precision required to maintain the spacecraft formation. This concept, fitting largely into a category of "real-scene 
wavefront sensing," is the primary technology focus for this call. 

This subtopic calls for novel approaches to high precision relative and/or absolute sensing of multiple spacecraft 
position and orientation errors for the purpose of controlling the fleet as a collective and coordinated observatory. 
Specifically, we are looking for proposals which address as many of the following technologies and concepts: 

? Real-scene wavefront sensing 
? Numerical mappings from sensed wavefront to control error signals 
? Nonlinear, robust estimation algorithms/filters for error determination 
? System-level, multi-stage sensing concepts for high precision, wide dynamic range application 
? Low-cost solutions to high precision formation error measurement 
? Sensing concepts which integrate wavefront measurement with independent navigation/attitude determina-
tion/relative range measurements to provide full system sensing solutions 
? Fault-tolerant estimation algorithms 

We would like to see solutions that involve integrated algorithms, software, and/or hardware, resulting in ground or 
space-based demonstrations, focused on supporting a range of unique and challenging missions in the SEU program. 

S2.04 Thermal Control and Management 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): JPL, MSFC 

Future spacecraft and instruments for NASA's Space Science Enterprise will require increasingly sophisticated 
thermal control technology to meet the demands of tight control with minimal mass and power resources. Cryogenic 
structures and other large-scale applications (down to a few Kelvin) are clearly an emerging trend.  Stringent optical 
alignment and sensor needs are requiring ever tighter temperature control, and heat flux levels from lasers and other 
similar devices are increasing. Large, distributed structures such as mirrors will require creative techniques to   
integrate structural, mechanical alignment, and thermal control functions. Nano and micro spacecraft will also drive 
the need for new technologies, particularly since such small spacecraft will have low thermal capacitance. This 
situation, combined with the need for tighter temperature control, will present a challenging situation when such 
spacecraft/instruments undergo transients. The use of "off-the-shelf" commercial spacecraft buses for science   
instruments will also present challenges. In general, high performance, low cost, low weight, and high reliability are 
prime technology drivers. Specific areas for which innovative proposals are sought include: 

? Advanced thermal control coatings such as variable emissive surfaces that permit adaptive intelligent control
? Cryogenic (3 K to 80 K) heat transport devices for sensor and /or optics cooling which incorporate a diode 
function
? Integrated structural, alignment, and thermal control concepts for very large structures
? Advanced analytical techniques for thermal modeling, focusing on techniques that can be easily integrated with 
emerging mechanical and optical analytical tools
? Advanced high conductivity materials, such as diamond films, which may be suitable for cryogenic applications

Many future space missions will have operational lifetimes of 5 to 15 years and will require similar lifetimes for 
cryogenic cooling systems. Both the lifetime and the reliability of the cryogenic systems are critical performance 
concerns. Mechanical coolers, thermoelectric coolers, radiative coolers, magnetic coolers, and combinations of these 
will be considered. Of interest are cryogenic coolers for cooling detectors, telescopes and instruments with long life, 
low vibration, low mass, low cost, and high efficiency. Specific areas of interest include: 

? Highly efficient coolers in the range of 4-8 Kelvin as well as 50 milli-Kelvin and below 
? Essentially vibration-free cooling systems such as reverse Brayton cycle cooler technologies 
? Highly reliable, efficient, low cost Stirling and pulse tube cooler technologies 
? Highly efficient magnetic cooling technologies, particularly at very low temperatures 
? Hybrid cooling systems that make optimal use of radiative coolers
? MEMS and miniature solid-state cooler systems

S2.05 Optical Technologies 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): JPL, LaRC, MSFC 

The NASA Space Science Enterprise is studying future missions to explore the Structure and Evolution of the Uni-
verse, which will require very large space observatories. In order to understand the Structure and Evolution of the 
Universe, a variety of observatories are necessary to observe cosmic phenomena from radio waves to the highest 
energy cosmic rays. These observatories will peer farther and view objects more fainter than current Earth-based or 
space-based observatories and therefore will have increased resolution and light-gathering ability by greatly in-
creasing the aperture size. It also will be necessary to operate some of these telescopes at cryogenic temperatures 
and at a substantial distance from the Earth. Apertures for normal incidence optics are required in the range of 20 - 
40 m in diameter, while grazing incidence optics are required to support apertures up to 10 m in diameter. For some 
missions, these apertures will form a constellation of telescopes operating as interferometers. These interferometric 
observatories will have effective apertures in the 100 - 1000 m diameter range. The observatories required for many 
future SEU missions will also be operated at cryogenic temperatures (30 K) and at a substantial distance from the 
Earth. Therefore, low mass of critical components such as the primary mirror and support and/or deployment struc-
ture is extremely important. It is also essential to develop actuators, deformable mirrors and other components for 
operation in a cryogenic environment. In order to meet the stringent optical alignment and tolerances necessary for a 
high quality telescope and to provide a robust design, there are potential significant benefits possible from employ-
ing systems that can adaptively correct for image degrading sources from inside and outside the spacecraft. This 
subtopic also includes correction systems for large aperture space telescopes that require control across the entire 
wavefront, typically at low bandwidth. The following technologies are sought: 

? Large, ultra-lightweight optical mirrors including membrane optics for very large aperture space telescopes and 
interferometers 
? Large, ultra-lightweight grazing incidence optics for x-ray mirrors with angular resolutions less than 5 arcsec
? Ultra-precise, low mass deployable structures to reduce launch volume for large-aperture space telescopes and 
interferometers 
? Segmented optical systems with high-precision controls; active and/or adaptive mirrors; shape control of de-
formable telescope mirrors; image stabilization systems 
? Advanced, wavefront sensing and control systems including image based wavefront sensors 
? Shape measurement and control of large aperture membrane optics
? Wavefront correction techniques and optics for large aperture membrane mirrors and refractors (curved lenses, 
fresnel lenses, diffractive lenses)
? Cryogenic optics, structures, and mechanisms for space telescopes and interferometers 
? Nanometer and picometer metrology for space telescopes and interferometers 
? High-precision pointing and attitude control systems for large space telescopes and interferometers 
? Space-fabricated optics and techniques including fabrication from raw materials or blanks, coatings, assembly 
of components, metrology, and system testing
? High-performance materials and fabrication processes for ultra-lightweight, high performance optics
? Advanced analytical models, simulations, and evaluation techniques and new integrations of suites of existing 
software tools allowing a broader and more in-depth evaluation of design alternatives and identification of op-
timum system parameters including optical, thermal, and structural performance of large space telescopes and 
interferometers
? Advanced, low-cost, high quality large optics fabrication processes and test methods including active metrology 
feedback systems during fabrication, and artificial intelligence controlled systems
? Technologies for testing new mirror materials and shapes in relevant environments including cryogenic testing. 
? New coatings and methods for applying them
? Long path length measurement techniques
? Innovative solutions to detect and correct errors in deployed optical systems
? Deployable optical benches to achieve reference baseline dimensions greater than those of the payload envelope
? High resolution (2 nm) long stroke (6mm) cryogenic actuators
? Wide field of view optics using square pore slumped micro-channel plates or equivalent 
? Coded masks for 5 mm x 5 mm x 5 mm pixels of high-Z passive metal (Pb or W) and ~4 m^2 area
? Grazing incidence focusing mirrors with response up to 150 keV 
? Develop fabrication techniques for ultra-thin-flat silicon (or like material) for grating substrates for x-ray ener-
gies < 0.5 keV 
? Large area thin blocking filters with high efficiency at low energy x-ray energies (< 600 eV) 




Novel optical materials, specialized optical fabrication techniques, and new optical metrology instruments and 
components for Earth- and space-based applications are needed as follows: 

? Develop novel materials and fabrication techniques for producing ultra-lightweight mirrors, high-performance 
diamond turned optics, and ultra-smooth (2-3 angstrom rms) replicated optics that are both rigid and light-
weight. Lightweight silicon carbide optics and structures are also desired. 
? Develop optics for focusing EUV and x-ray radiation where reductions in fabrication time and cost are sought. 
Developments are also needed in the areas of surface roughness and figure characterization of EUV and curved 
x-ray optics, especially Wolter systems. 
? Develop novel materials and fabrication techniques for producing cryogenic optics. Testing techniques, includ-
ing both full- and sub-aperture testing, for cryogenic optics are needed. Also desired are techniques for testing 
the durability of and stress in coatings used in harsh environments, particularly cryogenic optics. 
? Develop novel techniques for producing and measuring coatings and polarization control elements. Optical 
coatings for use in the EUV, UV, visible, IR and far IR for filters, beamsplitters, polarizers, and reflectors will 
be considered. Broadband polarizing- and non-polarizing cube-type beamsplitters are also needed. 
? Perform development related to fabrication of x-ray, gamma-ray, and neutron collimators that have the preci-
sion necessary to achieve arcsecond or sub-arcsecond imaging in solar physics and astrophysics when used in 
stationary multi-grid arrays or as rotating modulation. 
? Develop portable and miniaturized state-of-the-art optical characterization instrumentation, and rapid, large-area 
surface-roughness characterization techniques are needed. Also, develop calibrated processes for determination 
of surface roughness using replicas made from the actual surface. Traceable surface roughness standards suit-
able for calibrating profilometers over sub-micron to millimeter wavelength ranges are needed. 
? Develop instruments capable of rapidly determining the approximate surface roughness of an optical surface, 
allowing modification of process parameters to improve finish without the need to remove the optic from the 
polishing machine. Techniques for testing the figure of large, convex aspheric surfaces to fractional wave toler-
ances in the visible are needed. 
? Develop efficient, analytical, optical modeling and analysis programs capable of determining the ground-based 
and space-based performance of complex aberrated optical telescopes and instrument systems will be consid-
ered. Also, simple, well documented, flexible programs, which generate commands to operate a numerically 
controlled polishing machine given the tool wear profile and surface error map are desired. 
? Develop very low scattered light optical material thin film mirror coatings or mirrors for broad-band white light 
applications to planet detection space telescopes. 
? Develop a novel material for producing doubly curved, ultra-thin, unsupported shell, optical quality, telescope 
mirrors which are capable of being rolled for storage and transport. These mirrors will exceed one meter in di-
ameter, have an areal density of < 1.5 kg/m2, and have sufficient "memory" to enable it to return to its original 
configuration when unfurled. Fine adjustment will be achieved using actuator material embedded within the 
shell mirror or with a two-stage optics system or both. The reflective surface would not be damaged when the 
mirror is rolled. This material must tolerate the space environment without dimensional changes, stiffness 
changes, or loss of mechanical integrity. 

S2.06 Advanced Photon Detectors 
Lead Center: GSFC
Participating Center(s): JPL 

The technical requirements to support the Structure and Evolution of the Universe (SEU) science theme missions are 
extremely diverse, which is a consequence of the wide-ranging nature of the investigations. Technology develop-
ments are sought in the system context from energy detection through data reduction and scientific visualization 
needed to implement SEU missions.

The next generation of astrophysics observatories for the infrared (IR), ultra-violet (UV), x-ray, and gamma-ray 
bands require order-of-magnitude performance advances in detectors, detector arrays, readout electronics and other 
supporting and enabling technologies. Although the relative value of the improvements may differ among the four 
energy regions, many of the parameters where improvements are needed are present in all four bands. In particular, 
all bands need improvements in spatial and spectral resolutions, in the ability to cover large areas, and in the ability 
to support the readout of the thousands/millions of resultant spatial resolution elements. The SEU program seeks 
innovative technologies to enhance the scope, efficiency and resolution of instrument systems at all ener-
gies/wavelengths.

? The next generation of gravitational missions will require greatly improved inertial sensors.  Such an inertial 
sensor must provide a carefully fabricated test mass that has interactions with external forces (i.e., low magnetic 
susceptibility, high degree of symmetry, low variation in electrostatic surface potential, etc.) below 10-16 of the 
Earth's gravity, over time scales from several seconds to several hours.  The inertial sensor must also provide a 
housing for containing the proof mass in a suitable environment (i.e., high vacuum, low magnetic and electro-
static potentials, etc.).
? Advanced CCD detectors, including improvements in quantum efficiency and read noise, to increase the limit-
ing sensitivity in long exposures and improved radiation tolerance.  Electron-bombarded CCD detectors, 
including improvements in efficiency, resolution, and global and local count rate capability.  In the x-ray, we 
seek to extend the response to lower energies in some CCDs, and to higher, perhaps up to 50 keV, in others.
? Significant improvements in wide band gap (such as GaN and AlGaN) materials, individual detectors, and 
arrays for UV applications.
? Improved microchannel plate detectors, including improvements to the plates themselves (smaller pores, greater 
lifetimes, alternative fabrication technologies, e.g., silicon), as well as improvements to the associated electronic 
readout systems (spatial resolution, signal-to-noise capability, dynamic range), and in sealed tube fabrication 
yield.
? Imaging from low Earth orbit of air fluorescence UV light generated by giant airshowers by ultra-high energy 
(E > 1019 eV) cosmic rays require the development of high sensitivity and efficiency detection of 300 - 400 nm 
UV photons to measure signals at the few photon (single photo-electron) level.  A secondary goal minimizes the 
sensitivity to photons with a wavelength greater than 400 nm.  High electronic gain (~ 106), low noise, fast time 
response (< 10 ns), minimal dead time (< 5 percent dead time at 10 ns response time), high segmentation with 
low dead area (< 20 percent nominal,  < 5 percent goal), and the ability to tailor pixel size to match that dictated 
by the imaging optics.  Optical designs under consideration dictate a pixel size ranging from approximately 2 x 
2 mm2 to 10 x 10 mm2.  Focal plane mass must be minimized (2 g/cm2 goal).  Individual pixel readout.  The en-
tire focal plane detector can be formed from smaller, individual sub-arrays.
? For advanced x-ray calorimetry improvements in several areas are needed, including:
- Superconducting electronics for cryogenic x-ray detectors such as SQUID-based amplifiers and their multi-
plexers for low impedance cryogenic sensors and super-conducting single electron transistors and their 
multiplexers for high impedance cryogenic sensors;
- Micromachining techniques that enhance the fabrication, energy resolution, or count rate capability of closely-
packed arrays of x-ray calorimeters operating in the energy range from 0.1 keV to 10 keV;
- Surface micromachining techniques for improving integration of x-ray calorimeters with read-out electronics 
in large scale arrays.
? Improvements in readout electronics, including low power ASICs and the associated high density interconnects 
and component arrays to interface them to detector arrays.
? Superconducting tunnel junction devices and transition edge sensors for the UV and x-ray regions. For the UV, 
these offer a promising path to having "three dimensional" arrays (spatial plus energy). Improvements in energy 
resolution, pixel count, count rate capability, and long wavelength rejection are of particular interest. For the 
far-IR future background-limited SEU telescopes will need detectors with NEP < 10-20 Watts per root Hz pack-
aged in 100x100 pixel arrays with low-power readout devices, and the ideal detectors would be energy-
resolving. We seek techniques for fabrication of close packed arrays, with any requisite thermal isolation, and 
sensitive (SQUID or single electron transistor), fast, readout schemes and/or multiplexers.
? Arrays of CZT detectors of thickness 5 to 10 mm to cover the 10 - 500 keV range, and hybrid detector systems 
with a Si CCD over a CZT pixelated detector operating in the 2 - 150 keV range.


S3 Astronomical Search for Origins 

NASA's Origin's Program seeks the answers to two broad questions related to life on Earth as we know it. How did 
we get here and are we alone? The answers lie in an understanding of how galaxies, stars, and planetary systems 
were formed in the early universe. We must determine whether planetary systems and Earth-like planets are typical 
companions of average stars and if life beyond Earth is a rare, possibly nonexistent, occurrence or if it is robust and 
has spread throughout the galaxy. Origin's primary mission goals are to study the early universe, find planets around 
other stars, and search for life beyond Earth. The technologies and discoveries needed to achieve these goals fall into 
the categories of very large space observatory systems, precision spacecraft constellations, advanced astronomical 
instrumentation, and new techniques for laboratory astrobiology. 

S3.01 Ultralight Adaptive Large Telescope Systems 
Lead Center: MSFC
Participating Center(s): GSFC, JPL, LaRC 

The long-range goal of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems (ASO) theme in the Space Sci-
ence Enterprise is to detect, characterize, and ultimately image extra-solar planets in orbit around nearby stars. 
Results from these efforts may provide clues as to the existence of life on these planets and the nature of life within 
our own solar system. The level of image resolution needed to accomplish these observations requires the develop-
ment of telescopes with light gathering apertures that are many times the size of NASA's 8-meter Next Generation 
Space Telescope (NGST). Such large aperture requirements have recently stimulated the development of new and 
unconventional telescope design concepts, ranging from single light collection stations employing a myriad of dis-
tributed reflective mirrors to constellations of large telescopes flying in formation and operating as interferometers. 

In addition to a large aggregate aperture requirement, these new observatories must maintain a low areal density 
(including the optics, reaction structure, actuators, and wiring). 100 kg/m2 is typical for conventional telescopes, and 
NGST is striving to achieve between 10 and 15 kg/m2. However, for ASO missions and other future telescope 
programs, areal densities of “ kg/m2 or less are required to enable affordable and launchable system architectures. 
Other system design considerations include the ability to deploy components from a stowed launch configuration to 
a final on-orbit configuration without degrading the system's optical quality, the need for precise structural and 
system control mechanisms used to maintain diffraction-limited imaging capabilities, and the ability to successfully 
endure and perform within the harsh space environment. 

Specifically, this subtopic is soliciting concepts and enabling technologies for large space-based telescope systems 
designed to accomplish either near-term objectives (i.e., ~10m apertures and 1-10kg/m^2 areal densities) and/or far-
term objectives (i.e., 20-40m apertures and < 1kg/m^2 areal densities). Specific areas of interest include: 

? Novel concepts for space telescope system design and implementation
? Active/adaptive wavefront sensing and control at ambient and cryogenic temperatures
? Large, lightweight, cryogenic, optical materials
? Large, transmissive optics and optical materials
? Large, reflective optics and optical materials
? Low cost, in situ metrology techniques for space-deployed optics
? Low areal density precision structures 
? Pliable structures with shape memory
? Low weight, low cost actuators for optical surfaces
? Deformable, controllable optics
? Membrane mirrors 
? Non-contacting, shape control actuation for membrane mirrors 
? Integral membrane mirror and shape control actuation subsystem 
? Membrane mirror packaging and deployment 
? Large, aperture telescope structures, materials, and deployment 

S3.02 Precision Constellations for Interferometry 
Lead Center: JPL 
Participating Center(s): None

This subtopic includes hardware and software technologies necessary to establish, maintain and operate hyper-
precision spacecraft constellations at a level that enables separated spacecraft optical interferometry. Also included 
are technologies for analysis, modeling and visualization of such constellations. 

In a constellation for large effective telescope apertures, multiple, collaborative spacecraft in a precision formation 
collectively form a variable-baseline interferometer. These formations require the capability for autonomous preci-
sion alignment and synchronized maneuvers, reconfigurations, and collision avoidance. It is important that, in order 
to enable precision spacecraft formation keeping from coarse requirements (relative position control of any two 
spacecraft to less than one cm, and relative bearing of 1 arcmin over target range of separations from a few meters to 
tens of kilometers) to fine requirements (micron relative position control and relative bearing control of 0.1 arcsec), 
the interferometer payload would still need to provide at least 1 to 3 orders of magnitudes improvement on top of the 
S/C control requirements. The spacecraft also require onboard capability for optimal path planning, and time optimal 
maneuver design and execution. 

Innovations that address the above precision requirements are solicited for distributed constellation systems in the 
following areas: 

? Integrated optical/formation/control simulation tools
? Distributed, multi-timing, high fidelity simulations
? Formation modeling techniques
? Precision guidance, control architectures and design methodologies
? Centralized/decentralized formation estimation
? Distributed sensor fusion
? RF/optical precision metrology systems
? Formation sensors
? Precision micro-thrusters/actuators
? Autonomous re-configurable formation techniques
? Optimal, synchronized, maneuver design methodologies
? Collision avoidance mechanisms
? Formation management and station keeping
? Six degrees of freedom precision formation testbeds

S3.03 Astronomical Instrumentation 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): ARC 

Much of the scientific instrumentation used in future NASA observatories for the Origins Program theme will be 
similar in character to instruments used for present day space astrophysical observations. However, the performance 
and observing efficiency of these instruments must be greatly enhanced. The instrument components are expected to 
offer much higher optical throughput, larger fields of view, and better detector performance. The wavelengths of 
primary interest extend from the near-infrared to past 100 microns. Measurement techniques include imaging, pho-
tometry, spectroscopy, coronography, and polarimetry. Of particular interest are technologies supporting the 
following: 

Advanced Detectors 
These efforts should propose breakthrough capabilities in spectral coverage, large array size with uniform high 
quantum efficiency, ultra-low dark current, elevated operating temperatures, spectroscopic capabilities, or their 
ability to operate effectively and reproducibly over long periods (ex. 5-10 years of space observations at low power, 
extreme temperatures, etc.). 

High Performance Filters 
There is a critical need for filters with good in-band transmission and very low out-of-band transmission at all 
wavelengths of interest but particularly at wavelengths > 5 microns. Desirable passbands range from 50 percent to 
less than 1 percent with in-band transmissions > 70 percent. 

Other Optical and Opto-mechanical Instrument Components 
Given the call for multiple capability instruments, there is a growing need for breakthrough concepts in instrument 
optics which minimize the volume requirements while adding capabilities (spectral, or otherwise) to the instrument. 
These elements may include gratings, prisms, dichroics, or other novel components. 
Mechanical Coolers 
The best detectors for wavelengths > 5 microns usually need to be cooled to < 10 K. There are a number of proposed 
Origins missions which have cooling requirements from 50 mK to 20 K; highly stable (both mechanical and tem-
perature stability), long life coolers are needed for these. Efforts may address the component level such as materials 
for magnetic refrigerants or novel heat switches, or they may address entire systems such as pulse tube, J-T, sorp-
tion, or sub-kelvin coolers. 

S3.04 Astrobiology 
Lead Center: ARC 
Participating Center(s): None

Astrobiology includes the study of the origin, evolution and distribution of life in the universe. New technologies are 
required to enable the search for extant or extinct life elsewhere in the solar system, to obtain an organic history of 
planetary bodies, to discover and explore water sources elsewhere in the solar system and to distinguish microor-
ganisms and biologically important molecular structures within complex chemical mixtures. For example, gaseous 
biomarkers, produced by microbial communities, are among our targets in current search strategies for life in the 
atmospheres of extrasolar planets. Both gaseous and mineral biomarkers produced by these communities are pro-
foundly affected by internal biogeochemical cycling. The small spatial scales at which these biogeochemical 
processes operate necessitate measurements made using microsensors. Microbial ecology research at NASA could 
benefit enormously from collaboration of sensor technologists and microbial ecologists. The search for life on other 
planetary bodies will also require systems capable of moving and deploying instruments across and through varied 
terrain to access biologically important environments. 

A second element of Astrobiology is the understanding of the evolutionary development of biological processes 
leading from single cell organisms to multi-cell specimens and to complex ecological systems over multiple genera-
tions. Understanding the effects of gravity on the evolution of living systems is a fundamental question of 
substantial, inherent scientific value in our quest to understand life. In addition, radiation of varying levels is as-
sumed to have varying effects on the development and evolution of life. Knowledge of the effects of radiation and 
gravity on lower organisms, plants, humans and other animals (as well as elucidation of the basic mechanisms by 
which these effects occur) will be of direct benefit to the quality of life on Earth. These benefits will occur through 
applications in medicine, agriculture, industrial biotechnology, environmental management and other activities 
dependent on understanding biological processes over multiple generations. 

A third component of Astrobiology includes the study of evolution on ecological processes. Astrobiology intersects 
with NASA Earth science studies through the highly accelerated rate of change in the biosphere being brought about 
by human actions. One particular area of study with direct links to Earth science is microbe-environment interac-
tions. These interactions can be seen in carbon cycles and nitrogen cycles. Some examples of rapid changes that 
affect these microbial processes are increases in UV, increases in average and seasonal temperatures, and changes in 
the length of the growing season, all which are key issues in both Earth Science and Astrobiology. Additional areas 
include Controlled Environment Sustainability Research (CESR), growth chambers and monitoring capabilities. 
This research requires unique instrumentation and information science technologies that are not covered in the Earth 
science program. 

NASA seeks innovations in the following technology areas: 

Mobility/Sampling/Subsurface Water Detection Systems 
? Innovative techniques that meet these needs are required, e.g., for Mars exploration, technologies that would 
enable the aseptic acquisition of deep subsurface samples, the detection of aquifers, or the enhancement at the 
performance of long distance ground roving, tunneling, or flight vehicles are required. For Europa exploration, 
technologies which enable the penetration of deep ice are required. Desirable features for both Mars and Europa 
exploration include the ability to carry an array of instruments and imaging systems, to provide aseptic opera-
tion mode, and to maintain a pristine research environment. 
? Low cost lightweight systems to assist in the selection and acquisition of the most scientifically interesting 
samples are also of significant interest. 

Analytical Tools 
? High sensitivity (femtomole or better), high resolution methods applicable to all biologically relevant classes of 
compounds for separation of complex mixtures into individual components. 
? Advanced in situ and laboratory based, microbial sensing/monitoring system capable of providing quantitative 
spatial and temporal visualization of material and functions in selected specimens. Advanced miniaturized bio-
logical in situ sample acquisition and handling systems optimized for extreme environment applications. 
? High sensitivity (femtomole or better) characterization of molecular structure, chirality, and isotopic composi-
tion of biogenic elements (H, C, N, O, S) embodies individual compounds and structures. 
? High spatial resolution (5 angstrom level) electron microscopy techniques to establish details of external mor-
phology, internal structure, elemental composition and mineralogical composition of potential biogenic 
structures. 
? Innovative software to support studies of the origin and evolution of life. The areas of special interest are (1) 
biomolecular and cellular simulations; (2) evolutionary and phylogenetic algorithms and interfaces;  (3) DNA 
computation; and (4) image reconstruction and enhancement for remote sensing. 
? In order to address the imperative to understand gaseous biomarker production, we desire technologies capable 
of measuring a range of volatile compounds at small spatial scales, possibly through the coupling of gas diffu-
sion sensors to portable mass spectrometers. Improved sensor designs for a wide range of analytes, including 
oxygen, pH, sulfide, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and small molecular weight organic acids both on and near sur-
faces that could serve as habitats for microbes. 
? Nondestructive structural characterization of micro-areas of microsamples of rocks and minerals by diffraction 
(1-100 micron scale). Tools to Support Gravity and Radiation Studies of Biological Systems over Multiple 
Generations These technologies must be miniaturized to minimize weight, volume and power requirements and 
must operate autonomously for extended periods of time to accommodate monitoring multiple generations of 
organisms. Thus, instrumentation must be self-calibrating, require no or minimal consumables and be remotely 
controlled. 
? Biotechnology - determining mutation rates and genetic stability in a variety of organisms as well as accurately 
determining protein regulation changes in microgravity and radiation environments. 
? Automated chemical analytical instrumentation for determining gross metabolic characteristics of individual 
organisms and ecologies as well as chemical composition of environments. 
? Spectral/imaging technology with high resolution and low power requirements. 
? Habitat support - technologies for supporting miniature ecosystems isolated from their support environments, 
data collection and transmission technologies in concert with the automated chemical instrumentation described 
above. Candidate technologies include sensor and telemetry systems as well as variable-spectrum, low power 
light sources for simulating conditions on the early Earth. 

Algorithms for processing and analyzing recovered data. Instrumentation and information technologies to support 
the study of evolution of ecological processes and CESR are: 

? Miniature to microscopic, high resolution, field worthy, smart sensors or instrumentation for the accurate and 
unattended monitoring of environmental parameters that include, but are not limited to, solar radiation (190-800 
nm at < 1nm resolution), ions and gases of the various oxidation states of carbon and nitrogen (at the nanomolar 
level for ions in solution and at the femtomolar or better level for gases), in a variety of habitats (e.g., marine, 
freshwater, acid/alkaline hot springs, Antarctic climates or boreholes into the Earth). 
? High resolution, high sensitivity (femtomole or better) methods for the isolation and characterization of nucleic 
acids (DNA/RNA) from a variety of organic and inorganic matrices. 
? Mathematical models capable of predicting the combined effects of elevated pCO2 (change in CO2 over the 
eons) and solar UV radiation on carbon sequestration and N2O emissions from experimental data obtained from 
field and laboratory studies of C-cycling rates, N-cycling rates, as well as diurnal and seasonal changes in solar 
UV. 
? Microscopic techniques and technologies to study soil cores, microbial communities, pollen samples, etc. in a 
laboratory environment for the detailed spectroscopic analysis relevant to evolution as a function of climate 
changes. 
? Robotic system designed to provided access to terrestrial and extraterrestrial environments such as deep ocean, 
hydrothermal vents. 

S3.05 High Contrast Astrophysical Imaging 
Lead Center: JPL 
Participating Center(s): None

This subtopic addresses the unique problem of imaging faint astrophysical objects that are located within the ob-
scuring glare of much brighter sources. Some examples include planetary systems beyond our own and the detailed, 
inner structure of galaxies with very bright nuclei. Contrast ratios of one million to one billion over an angular spa-
tial scale of less than one arcsecond are typical of these objects. 

The innovative research focuses on advances in coronagraphic and star light cancellation instruments that operate at 
visible and infrared wavelengths. Typically, these instruments would be intended for operation in space as part of a 
future observatory mission. Some examples of areas of interest include: 

? Ultra-low scatter optics and coatings 
? Advanced aperture apodization techniques 
? High precision, wavefront, error sensing techniques 
? Small stroke, high precision deformable mirrors and controllers 
? Advanced starlight coronagraphic instrument concepts 
? Interferometric starlight cancellation techniques 

For infrared applications, operating at cryogenic temperatures is a typical requirement. 


S4 Exploration of the Solar System 

NASA's program for Exploration of the Solar System seeks to answer fundamental questions about the Solar System 
and life: How do planets form? Why are planets different from one another? Where did the makings of life come 
from? Did life arise elsewhere in the Solar System? What is the future habitability of Earth and other planets? The 
search for answers to these questions requires that we augment the current remote sensing approach to solar system 
exploration with a robust program that includes in situ measurements at key places in the Solar System and the 
return of materials from them for later study on the Earth. We envision a variety of missions to achieve this includ-
ing a comet nucleus sample return, a Europa lander, a rover or balloon-borne experiment on Saturn's moon Titan, 
and a possible Pluto Express to name a few. Numerous, new technologies will be required to enable such ambitious 
missions. 

S4.01 Science Instruments for Conducting Solar System Exploration 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): ARC 

Being able to achieve the Solar System exploration goals requires innovative miniaturized science instruments and 
instrument components that offer significant improvement over the state of the art in terms of size, mass, power, 
cost, performance, and robustness. This subtopic seeks to support the development of advanced instrument technol-
ogy that has potential for scientific investigation on future planetary missions. New measurement concepts, 
advances in existing instrument concepts, advances in critical components such as detectors, sampling handling 
techniques and technologies that enable integrated instrument architectures are all of interest. Proposers are encour-
aged to relate their proposed technology development to future planetary science goals as much as possible. 

While both remote and in situ sensing instruments are of interest, NASA’s space science missions will increasingly 
rely upon in situ characterization of the atmosphere, surface and subsurface regions of planets, satellites, and small 
bodies. These instruments may be deployed on surface landers and rovers, subsurface penetrators, cryobots, and 
airborne platforms. These instruments must be capable of withstanding operation in space and planetary environ-
mental extremes, which include temperature, pressure, radiation, and impact stresses. A reasonable target for an in 
situ science instrument concept is 1-kilogram mass, 1-liter volume, and 1 watt-hour of energy although for mission 
critical capabilities, additional resources might be available. 

A wide range of in situ instruments is of interest--geological, chemical, biological, physical, and environmental. 
Particular emphasis is needed for astrobiology related measurements seeking to understand the origin and evolution 
of life and pre-biotic processes. New in situ analysis techniques are desired to identify and quantify biogenically 
important elements (C, H, N, O, P, and S) and their compounds (e.g., CH4, NOx, H2O) within extraterrestrial  
atmospheres, soils, ices, sedimentary rocks, and minerals. 

The following future mission needs will receive emphasis during proposal selection. 

Mars Surveryor Missions.  Missions to Mars will include both orbiters and landers with launches occuring ap-
proximately every 26 months. The high-level science drivers for Mars include determining if life ever arose on 
Mars, characterizing the ancient and present climate as well as climate processes, determining the evolution of the 
Martian surface and interior, and characterizating of the environment in preparation for human exploration. 

Outer Solar System Missions.  Future, outer planet, mission opportunities might include a Europa lander, a Titan 
lander, a Pluto Express, and/or a comet nucleus sample return. Instruments for Europa and Titan are particularly 
challenging because of the extreme environmental constraints. Europa measurement needs include characterization 
of the near-surface composition, determination of the compositional, geophysical, and geological context for the 
surface site, and a search for indications of Europan biology. Titan drivers include a determination of the distribution 
and composition of organics, and atmospheric dynamics. 

Discovery Program Missions.  Discovery program missions represent a series of competed focused missions to a 
variety of solar system objects. These objects may include orbiters, landers, flybys, balloons, and airplanes to study 
a wide variety of science goals involving geology, geochemistry, geophysics, atmospheres and climates, and parti-
cles and fields. Instrumentation and instrument concepts that address this broad range of needs will be considered. 

Example Measurement Needs 
Meeting the needs for the Solar System exploration goals requires a significant arsenal of advanced scientific in-
strumentation. Examples of instruments that might meet some of the above goals include, but are not limited to, the 
following: 

? Chemical sensing instrumentation for the surface and subsurface chemical, mineralogy, and isotopic analysis of 
soils, rocks, and ices. Examples include Raman spectrometers, laser-induced breakdown spectrometers, wa-
ter/ice detectors, age-dating systems, electrochemical systems, thin film sensors, liquid and gas chromatography 
systems, gas chromatograph-mass spectrometers and other mass analyzing systems. 
? Instrumentation focused on exobiological assessments for the identification and characterization of biomarkers 
of extinct or extant life or prebiotic molecules. Examples include ultraviolet-Raman, infrared reflectance and 
transmittance, fluorescence microscopy, total organic carbon analyzers, microcalorimetry concepts, NMR spec-
troscopy, chromatography systems, CHONS isotope analysis, biosensor concepts, ion mobility spectrometers or 
other molecular identification instrumentation capable of operating alone or as part of a gas chromatograph 
system. 
? Sensing instrumentation that integrates such functions as separation, reagent addition, and detection, especially 
using emerging "lab-on-a-chip" technologies.
? Suboptical microscopy instrumentation to characterize morphology, elemental and mineralogical composition, 
such as electron microscopy techniques and atomic force microscopy. 
? Instrumentation for the chemical and isotopic analysis of planetary atmospheres. 
? Physical and environmental sensing systems, such as seismic and meteorological sensors, humidity sensors, 
wind and particle size distribution sensors. 
? Particles and fields measurements, such as magnetometers, and electric field monitors. 
? Enabling in situ instrument component and support technologies, such as 2-10 micron laser sources, miniatur-
ized pumps, sample inlet systems, valves, and fluidic technologies for sample preparation. 
? Advanced detectors and focal plane arrays in the regimes of radar/sub-mm through IR/Vis/UV. 




S4.02 Planetary Mobility and Robotics, Sub-Surface Access, and Autonomous Control Technologies 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): ARC 

During the future exploration of planetary and lunar surfaces and the surface of small solar system bodies (such as 
comets and asteroids), new tools in the areas of surface robotic systems, sub-surface systems, aerial systems, and 
autonomous software need to be developed. These technologies are required for advanced scientific exploration of 
planetary surfaces by providing access to challenging surface sites, collection of sub-surface samples, investigation 
of a site through an aerial survey, and the software required for long-duration survival on the planet surface. In 
particular, this subtopic seeks to solicit research contributions that are in the following areas: 
? Airborne systems includ autonomous fixed-wing aircraft, airships or blimps for long-duration scientific investi-
gations, and aerobots and balloons for atmospheric and surface exploration. 
? Surface systems includ science rovers for detailed in situ investigation, advanced surface mobility systems for 
access to high-risk terrain, manipulation and sample-handling systems for precision placement of instruments 
and sampling systems, and multiple, cooperating robotic systems for the development of a sustained robotic 
presence through robotic colonies and sensor webs. 
? Sub-surface systems includ shallow sampling systems for robust collection of rock and soil samples from less 
than 1 meter in depth, deep drilling systems for exploration of sub-surface strata including the search for possi-
ble sub-surface water aquifers, low-cost, low-mass penetrator systems that are capable of conducting limited 
scientific discovery over a wide terrain area, sub-surface mobility systems that allow for the autonomous explo-
ration of sub-surface material including soil, rock, and ice, and autonomous underwater robotic systems for 
exploration of possible sub-surface oceans on the moons of Jupiter. 
? Autonomous software technologies includ autonomous navigation techniques, algorithms for multiple cooper-
ating systems, behavior-based control systems, advanced path planning techniques, software for intelligent 
systems, robotic reconfiguration strategies, and autonomous scientific data collection. 

S4.03 Detection and Reduction of Biological Contamination on Flight Hardware 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): ARC 

As space flight missions venture into planetary atmospheres and onto surfaces, NASA is committed to the imple-
mentation of its planetary protection policy and regulations. There is a need to support projects in all mission phases 
from design to close-out. One of the great challenges is to develop or find the technologies that will make compli-
ance with planetary protection policy routine and affordable. Planetary protection is directed to (1) the control of 
terrestrial microbial contamination associated with robotic space vehicles intended to land, orbit, flyby, or otherwise 
be in the vicinity of extraterrestrial solar system bodies, and (2) the control of contamination of the Earth by extra-
terrestrial solar system material collected and returned by such missions.  The implementation of these requirements 
will ensure that biological safeguards to maintain extraterrestrial bodies as biological preserves for scientific investi-
gations are being followed in NASA's space program.

To fulfill its commitment, NASA seeks technologies that will support its needs in the area of cleaning, cleaning 
validation, maintenance of biologically clean work areas, encapsulation and containerization, and archival preserva-
tion of organic and inorganic samples. Examples of such technologies include but are not limited to: 

? Low temperature, non-corrosive, sterilization techniques (room temperature and below). 
? Non-abrasive, cleaning techniques for narrow aperture, occluded areas.
? Ultra clean assembly processes for non-assembly line (unique and/or limited production) hardware. 
? Direct and rapid in situ monitoring of particles and biological contamination on surfaces with various shape, 
finish, electrical conductivity, etc. 
? Rapid cleaning validation methods with high sensitivity for the major classes of biological molecules: proteins, 
amino acid, DNA/RNA, lipids, polysaccharides. 
? Containerization and encapsulation of samples to be returned to Earth, including innovative mechanisms for 
isolation, sealing, and leak detection. 

S4.04 Lightweight Materials for Planetary Aerocapture, and Spacecraft Structures and Deployables 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): LaRC 

The desire to launch deep space mission payloads on lower cost, smaller launch vehicles has increased as projects 
have become more constrained due to budget pressures. In light of these factors, new concepts of using thin film 
structures or space systems to accomplish mission critical functions such as mobility (balloons), aerocapture (bal-
lutes), and deployable multifunctional structures (radiators, struts, antenna, etc.) are gaining importance. Low mass, 
low volume, space asset functionality is critical to enabling new missions to withstand the harsh environments (For 
example, temperature and atmospheric conditions) at Venus and Titan if we wish to dramatically reduce the cost of 
in situ science. We wish to identify, evaluate, and develop thin film materials, systems and associated technologies 
that will be compatible with ballute, balloon and the low-mass multifunctional-structure requirements listed below. 
A systems engineering perspective is encouraged. Proposals should address how materials/ configurations are com-
patible with expected preflight configurations, subsequent in-flight configurations, and attendant environments. 
Materials and processes and their associated mission use constraints and must have the potential to meet all impor-
tant requirements, or they will not be considered. 
Technology innovations sought include these areas:

? Ballute materials for aerocapture missions contain high temperature capability (> 400 C), high emissivity e > 
0.8, low mass-areal density < 10 gm/m2, thin films with appropriate stability and dynamics response. The abil-
ity to withstand aerodynamic stresses/temperatures during deployment and aerocapture sequences. 
? Balloon and aerobot materials and associated seaming technology with capability to withstand acidic (sulfuric 
acid) atmosphere and high temperatures (withstand up to 500 C - Venus or in the case of Titan down to -170 C) 
at areal densities of < 10gm/m2. Low packing density is needed for the launch and cruise phase of missions to 
Venus or Titan. Issues to address are mass, material strength (thin films/composites, metallization, rip stop 
properties), space environment durability and lifetime; retention of properties after tight packing; and manufac-
turing issues including edge capture, joint concepts, and prelaunch repair. 
? Low mass multifunctional structures or membranes integrated with electronics, power sources, thermal control 
or communication capabilities with areal densities under 0.1 kg/m2 such that they would be applicable to large 
area ultra-lightweight deployable or inflatable structures. Specific areas of interest are thermal technologies for 
thin films and membranes; development of active or passive thermal control systems and models for the elec-
tronics integrated with membrane structures; development of substrate thinning and bonding processes; 
development of materials with controllable surface properties that, when combined with integrated control 
electronics, could adapt to changing environments or mission needs; space rigidizable thin films; and shape 
memory thin films/low density polymeric materials for deployable structures. 

S4.05 Advanced Miniature and Micro Avionics and Electronics for Deep Space Systems 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): None

The strategic plan within the Space Science Enterprise at NASA requires intense exploration of a wide variety of 
bodies in the Solar System within a modest budget. To achieve this will require revolutionary advances over the 
capabilities of traditional spacecraft systems and a broadening of the tool set through the introduction of new kinds 
of space exploration systems. These systems will include, but are not limited to, orbiters, landers, atmospheric 
probes, rovers, penetrators, aerobots (balloons), planetary aircraft, subsurface vehicles (ice/soil), and submarines. 
Also of interest is the delivery of distributed sensor systems consisting of networks of tiny (< 1 kg), individual ele-
ments which combine sensors, control, and communications in highly integrated packages and which are scattered 
over planetary surfaces, atmospheres, oceans, or subsurfaces. 

New technology is needed in all spacecraft areas for mass, power, and volume reductions, and for application to 
harsh environments such as extreme temperature, radiation, and mechanical shock. Advances in microelectronics, 
avionics architecture, packaging and thermal control are encouraged. Applicable technology areas include but are 
not limited to: 



? Avionics, including highly integrated, ultra low power and extreme long life components 
? Avionics components able to operate in extreme environments: low temperature, high temperature, high radia-
tion 
? Thermal management for electronics, including active and passive techniques
? Three-dimensional VLSI, chip stacking, multi-chip-module stacking and other advanced packaging techniques
? Low power, COTS-based radiation tolerant and advanced power management technique 
? Radiation hard, high density, non-volatile mass memory
? Fault tolerance and onboard maintenance design and analysis techniques for severely constrained environments 
and extreme long life missions
? Concepts and designs for test and validation of design integrity and performance of IP based ASICs, mixed 
signal ASICs and MEMS
? High resolution, high sampling rate, low power and radiation-hardened, analog-digital converters, and digital 
signal processing hardware components with algorithm design environments for rapid design and prototyping 

S4.06 Telecommunications Tech. for High Rate Transmission over Large Distances and Local Planetary 
Networks 
Lead Center: JPL
Participating Center(s): GRC, GSFC 

This subtopic discusses innovations for both Optical and RF communication technologies. 

RF Communications 
? Ultra-small, low-cost, low-power, innovative, deep-space transponders and components, including integrated 
circuits such as microwave monolithic integrated circuits (MMICs) and Bi-CMOS circuits. Signal processing 
circuits for receivers that provide carrier tracking, command and ranging capabilities. Low-voltage, multi-
function MMIC designs to provide low-noise down-conversion, automatic gain-control, up-conversion, and 
transceiver functions at (Ka-band (32 GHz). MMIC modulators with drivers to provide large linear phase 
modulation (above 2.5 radians), high-data rate BPSK/QPSK modulation at X-band (8.4 GHz) and Ka-band. 
Miniature, ultra-stable and voltage-controlled oscillators for deep space communications and GPS applications. 
Miniature, low-loss X-band and Ka-band switches and diplexers. 
? Advanced Ka-band MMIC and photonic packages for high data rate (1 Gbps) applications. 
? Miniature, high-efficiency power amplifiers and RF power devices operating in the X- and Ka-band, transmit-
ters with output power levels up to 20 watts that can survive the space environment with a minimum mean-
time-to-failure of ten years. 

Optical Communications
? Efficient (greater than 20 percent wall plug), lightweight (less than 1kg including drivers), flight-qualifiable, 
actively Q-switched laser transmitters (diode-pumped based) with 1 to 3 W of average output power at repeti-
tion rates between 5 and 50 kHz. Pulse generation time delay uncertainty should be less than 1 nsec with a 
pulse-width no greater than 30 ns. High (> 1000) modulation extinction ratio is highly desirable. 
? Novel schemes for stray-light control and sunlight mitigation. Also, transmit/receive isolation methods provid-
ing at least 130 dB of isolation. 
? Acquisition and tracking technologies including algorithms for sub-micro-radian laser beam pointing from 
deep-space ranges. 
? Low power consumption, high quantum efficiency and fill factor and compact acquisition and tracking focal 
plane array detectors incorporating on-chip processing for window control, pixel gain/offset correction window, 
background/pattern noise calibration, bright spot location for initial acquisition, and pixel summation mode. 
Multiple windowing capability with different integration times for each window is also highly desirable. 
? Lightweight high precision (< 0.1 micro-rad over 1-500 Hz) inertial reference sensors for use onboard space-
craft) inertial reference sensors (gyros,) for use onboard spacecraft. 
? Silicon Avalanche Photodiode Detectors (APD) with > 3 mm active area diameter, bandwidth > 200 MHz, QE 
> 40 percent at 1064 nm, very low noise (k factor < 0.1) and gain > 100. Also, 250 micron diameter (Si APD) 
detector/amplifier with sufficient bandwidth for 2.5 Gbps communications. 

S4.07 Deep Space Power and Propulsion Systems 
Lead Center: GRC
Participating Center(s): JPL, JSC, MSFC 

Innovative concepts utilizing advanced technology are solicited in the areas of energy conversion, storage, power 
electronics, and power system materials. Power levels of interest range from tens of milliwatts to several kilowatts. 
NASA Space Science missions require energy systems with high energy density, reliability and low overall costs 
(including operations). Likewise, propulsion is a critical technology area for Space Science missions. Propulsion 
functions include precision positioning, in-space maneuvering, vehicle reaction control, planetary injection, and 
planetary descent/ascent. The mass and volume of spacecraft are usually dominated by the propulsion system, lim-
iting mission capabilities. Innovations are needed in chemical and electric propulsion technologies to reduce the 
mass and volume of propulsion systems while increasing their capability, reliability, and lifetime. Advances are 
sought in the following areas: 

Energy Conversion 
Advances in photovoltaic technology are sought, including rigid arrays, thin film arrays, and concentrator arrays 
with substantial increases in specific power (w/kg) and decreased cost. Must accommodate radiation resistance, low 
temperature/low intensity, and high temperature/ high intensity operation.

Advances in radioisotope power conversion to electricity (tens of milliwatts to hundreds of watts with efficiencies > 
20  percent). Includes advances in AMTEC, thermophotovoltaics, thermoelectrics, Stirling, and microfabricated 
power systems. 

Energy Storage 
Includes advances in primary and secondary (rechargeable) battery technologies. Technologies include lithium ion 
batteries, lithium polymer batteries and other advanced concepts providing dramatic increases in mass and volume 
energy density (w-hr/kg and w-hr/liter). Must be able to operate in harsh environments, including high radiation and 
low/high temperature regimes. 

For operation on planetary surfaces, the use of regenerative fuel cells, both conventional and unitized - passive 
designs, with substantial increases in mass and volume specific energy for those situations where there are substan-
tial time periods of charging/recharge (anywhere from hours to days). 

Power Electronics 
Advanced electronic technologies with reduced volume and mass capable of high-temperature, low-temperature 
(cryogenic), or wide-temperature operation, radiation resistance, and/or electromagnetic shielding with thermal 
control. 

Thermal control integral to electrical devices capable of  > 100 W/cm2 heat flux. 

Advanced electronic materials, devices and circuits including transformers, integrated circuits, capacitors, ultra 
capacitors, electro-optical devices, micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), sensors, low loss magnetic cores, 
motor drives, electrical actuation. 

Advanced PMAD control technologies including fault detection, isolation, and system reconfiguration, including 
"smart components," built-in test, health management, and power-line or wireless communication. 

Power System Materials 
Advances are sought in materials, surfaces, and components that are durable for atomic oxygen, soft x-ray, electron, 
proton, and ultraviolet radiation and thermal cycling environments, lightweight electromagnetic interference shield-
ing, and high-performance, environmentally durable radiators. 

Propulsion Systems 
Advanced electric propulsion technologies, including thrusters and advanced power processing, are needed for 
robotic planetary transportation applications. Technologies are sought that increase efficiency, reduce mass, and 
reduce system complexity. High-performance, bipropellant technologies (specific impulse > 350 sec) are of high 
interest for planetary propulsion applications. Micropropulsion technologies, applicable to spacecraft that less than 
40 kg, are of high interest to Space Science. These propulsion technologies should emphasize system simplicity, low 
power requirements, minimal mass, and leverage the unique nature of microscale devices. Propellant management 
components (valves, flow control/regulation, fluid isolation) are needed for all of the electric, chemical, and micro 
propulsion systems described above.













This page has intentionally been left blank.



 




8.2  STTR Research Topics

To reduce overlap and streamline administrative and programmatic functions, NASA has established areas of ex-
cellence for each of its field installations. The most significant, as noted in NASA’s management plan, are termed 
Centers of Excellence (CE). There is one CE for each NASA installation. Each CE represents a focused, Agency-
wide leadership responsibility in a specific area of technology or knowledge. CE’s are charted with a clear definition 
of their capabilities and boundaries. They are chartered to be preeminent within the Agency, if not worldwide, with 
respect to the human resources, facilities, and other critical capabilities associated with the particular area of excel-
lence. Each CE must maintain or increase the Agency’s preeminent position in their assigned area in line with the 
program requirements of the Strategic Enterprises and the long-term interests of the Agency. The NASA STTR 
Program is aligned with the CE’s. This year four CE’s are participating. Research topics rotate each year among the 
different CE’s. The topic will be focused on some of the product areas or challenges faced by the CE.




8.2.1  Human Operations in Space: Intelligent Medical Systems	142
8.2.2  Turbomachinery: Ultra-Efficient Engine Technology	142
8.2.3  Materials and Structures: Materials Development	144
8.2.4  Launch and Payload Processing Systems	145


8.2.1  Human Operations in Space: Intelligent Medical Systems
NASA Installation:  Johnson Space Center (JSC)

The Center of Excellence for Human Operations in Space seeks to expand the human experience into the far reaches 
of space through exploring, using, and enabling the development of space. Within these goals, the practice of medi-
cine in space is confounded by severe restrictions on vehicle and personnel resources. Current medical operations 
concepts rely on non-physician astronauts with minimal medical experience who are supported by extensive com-
munications with Earth-based medical personnel. As we move to longer duration missions further from Earth or 
involve more dangerous activities such as significant "hard hat" construction activities in space, the need for more 
autonomous emergency medical care becomes acute. A human Mars mission, for example, would take a multicul-
tural crew of 4 to 6 people on a 6 to 8 month journey to the red planet. Upon arriving, the crew can expect to stay 
about 1.5 years on the surface before returning. Communication delays of up to 40 minutes round trip make emer-
gency support from the ground an impossibility. Additionally, many medical emergencies normally require a team 
of doctors, nurses and other specialty medical professionals such as laboratory technicians, pharmacists, radiologists, 
and pathologists. Instead, a relatively small crew with specialties in electrical and mechanical engineering, astrobi-
ology, geology, and other mission critical skills but little training and practice in emergency medical response will 
have to handle medical emergencies of all sorts under extremely stressful conditions. Clearly, intelligent medical 
systems will have to be devised to support these efforts and will have to become physician-equivalent helpers in the 
event of critical emergencies.

A variety of technologies are required including but not limited to:

? Visual programming shells/interfaces that allow physicians and other medical experts to easily capture their 
knowledge for diagnostic aids, decision support tools, medical protocol control, multimedia training tools, and 
other support systems. 
? Methods of coordinating the activities of teams, such as control through RF linked palmtop computers or other 
means, to ensure adequate emergency medical response. 
? Methods for rapidly entering medical records and comparison with existing records for rapid diagnostic support, 
allowing more natural and easier ways of interacting with or accessing medical knowledge in the context of real 
data. 
? Medical data visualization techniques that provide large quantities of complex data in easy to understand and 
manipulate forms, allowing questions about the data to be easily and intuitively investigated in an interactive 
fashion. 
? The use of physiological simulation models to aid in protocol and procedure development for emergency medi-
cal response.
? The use of detailed physiological models of individual patients in decision support to allow prediction of the 
effect of treatments or the administration of pharmaceuticals for guiding protocol selection in particular cases. 
? On-the-spot tools for providing decision support and “just-in-time” training to allow relatively unskilled indi-
viduals to perform emergency treatment that they would not otherwise be capable of performing.
? Basic tools for creating intelligent, tutoring applications that can be used to insert medical training into long 
term missions, especially those that use a multimedia case study approach. 
? Novel automated means for delivering various aspects of emergency medical care to free up crew members to 
take on other tasks.


8.2.2  Turbomachinery: Ultra-Efficient Engine Technology 
NASA Installation:  Glenn Research Center

The Center of Excellence for turbomachinery refers to turbine driven systems for propulsion, power generation, and 
energy conversion. These systems include rotating and related components and associated enabling technologies. 
Propulsion plays a critical role in enabling advanced aircraft designs and concepts required to achieve dramatic 
improvements in efficiencies of operations. Both overall cycle pressure ratio and turbine inlet temperature levels that 
can be achieved limit today's engine designs. Innovative, technological increases in both parameters are required to 
make improvements in performance and efficiency as well as minimizing global climate impact.


The ultra-efficient engine technology (UEET) program addresses local air quality concerns by developing technolo-
gies to reduce nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions by 70 percent at landing and takeoff (LTO) conditions from the 1996 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standards. UEET also addresses potential ozone depletion con-
cerns by providing combustor technologies that will not enable discernible aircraft impact on the ozone layer during 
cruise operation (up to a 90 percent reduction). Additionally, the UEET program addresses the potential of climate 
impact on long term aviation growth by providing critical propulsion technologies for a dramatic increase in effi-
ciency to enable reductions of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions based on an overall fuel savings goal of about 15 
percent for large subsonic transport or as much as 8 percent for supersonic and/or small aircraft. 

In general, UEET will require innovative technologies that will enable:

? Turbomachinery aerodynamic loading improvement (30 to 50 percent) relative to current best practices
? Increased turbine rotor inlet temperature capability (3100o F) for performance with commercial engine life 
? Engine weight reduction (20-25 percent) relative to current best practices 
? Reduced cooling requirement (15 to 25 percent) relative to current best practices 
? Cruise nitrogen oxide (NOx) production comparable to Landing/Takeoff NOx reduction
? Supersonic cruise nitrogen oxide (< 4 gm NOx/kg of fuel burned) 

Innovations sought include:

? Propulsion Systems Integration and Assessment: Innovative tools that will enable rapid assessments of total 
conceptual systems and the systems' potential for meeting the Program goals. In addition, tools that can deter-
mine the levels of aerosols and particulates emitted from propulsion systems in order to determine health risk 
levels. Innovative tools that can aide the High Fidelity System Simulations that will be performed incorporating 
UEET technologies to better understand complex component interactions. 
? Emissions Reduction: Innovative, low emissions, combustor concepts and technologies that will produce 
cleaner burning combustors to offset the increased NOx produced by the future, more fuel efficient engines with 
higher pressure ratios and temperatures. Novel combustion control approaches that will contribute to ultra-low 
levels of NOx production. 
? Highly Loaded Turbomachinery: Revolutionary turbomachinery technologies for increased performance and 
efficiency that enable fuel burn (CO2 emissions) reductions of up to 15 percent. Inventive turbo-machinery 
technologies for lighter-weight, reduced-stage cores, low-pressure (LP) spools, and propulsors for high-
performing, highly-efficient, and environmentally-compatible propulsion systems. Specifically, revolutionary 
concepts for significantly increased aero loading, trailing edge wake control, and higher cooling effectiveness. 
Innovative fan technologies that will reduce weight and increase efficiency while satisfying noise constraints. 
? Revolutionary physics-based models for flow control, cooling, and particulate formation to understand the 
concepts and to design component hardware for rig test demonstrations of fan, core compressor, and HP/LP tur-
bine systems. 
? Materials and Structures for High Performance: Advanced high temperature materials that will enable high-
performance, high efficiency, and environmentally compatible propulsion systems. Technologies for high tem-
perature, highly durable, and lightweight materials and structures for engine systems. 
? Propulsion-Airframe Integration (PAI): Development of advanced technologies to yield lower drag propulsion 
system integration with the airframe for a wide range of vehicle classes. Innovative tools that can aide the de-
termination of optimum nacelle placement and optimum shaping to both the nacelle and the airframe to 
minimize drag. Inventive tools that can aide in active flow control. 
? Intelligent Propulsion Controls: Revolutionary, autonomous, propulsion system designs which allow the control 
system, independent of pilot interaction, maximize performance across the particular mission profile while at 
the same time minimize environmental impact. Such a control system could also adjust system characteristics so 
as to maximize individual component life and, therefore, improve propulsion system life and safety. 
? Technologies that include innovative, high temperature sensors that can measure gaseous emissions, exit gas 
temperatures, monitor combustion instabilities, as well as make noninvasive measurements of boundary layers 
to monitor separation. 
? Inventive control logic to enable the minimization of combustor gaseous emissions, minimization of the com-
bustion exit gas pattern factor, minimization of clearances between rotating and stationary hardware.
8.2.3  Materials and Structures: Materials Development 
NASA Installation:  Langley Research Center

This Center of Excellence for Materials and Structures targets innovative tools and revolutionary technologies for 
radically different materials and design concepts which can lead to significantly lower operating and manufacturing 
costs, increased flight safety, and markedly reduced structural weight in aerospace vehicles for the new millennium. 
A leap in traditional technologies currently available is necessary to enable revolutionary advances in aerospace 
materials development. The core technology challenge to support this Center of Excellence for this solicitation is:

Materials Development
Advanced synthetic materials are typically made by macroscale mixing of the required reactive components. This 
top down approach results in some control of parameters such as the distribution of molecular weights, microstruc-
ture and architecture of the product. However, the manufacture of advanced materials with mechanical properties 
and thermo-oxidative stability required for aerospace applications usually involves the use of hazardous chemicals 
for which waste disposal costs are high. In contrast, biological systems fabricate complex, multifunctional and ro-
bust materials, using a few basic components under non-hostile environmental conditions, to achieve structural 
control at the nanoscale (less than 100 nm) level. Biologically inspired methods for manufacture of high perform-
ance materials are sought. Areas of interest include the following:

? Biomimetically Synthesized Materials: Biological systems are capable of efficiently synthesizing materials 
for complex functions using very basic components. The secret is in the means by which hierarchical structural 
control is achieved. This mechanism for controlled fabrication at the nanoscale may be harnessed in revolution-
ary methods such as self-assembly to produce new materials suitable for aerospace use. Organic and metallic 
systems and fabrication processes that mimic biological structures and functions are sought. Some applications 
of interest are stimuli responsive materials for structural applications, adaptive optics, self-powered, structural 
components, functionally graded systems, controlled porosity, selective reinforcement and compositionally 
graded alloys. 
? Nanostructured Metal Systems: The recent development of novel techniques has made possible the synthesis 
of a new class of materials with microstructure of characteristic dimension less than 100nm (nano-structure 
metals) and with potential for vastly improved performance. Work is needed to understand, at the smallest 
scale, the fundamental mechanisms controlling behavior of these new metal systems, and how the processing 
interacts with microstructure to determine engineering properties. Some emphasis should be placed on retention 
of property-optimized, nano-scale characteristics in bulk material and finished products. 
? Self-Repairing Systems: Self-healing and self-repair are both characteristics desirable for materials useful in 
aerospace applications such as inflatable systems and structural components. Approaches to self-adaptive heal-
ing surfaces with the ability to sense, identify and repair damage are desirable. Various chemistries and/or 
design of mechanisms for self-repair in organic and metallic systems are sought. 
? Multifunctional Systems: Multifunctionality may be achieved by the synergistic relationships in a multi-
component system. Revolutionary methods for the fabrication of organic/inorganic hybrids capable of multiple 
functions including but not limited to self-healing, self-repairing, self-sensing, load bearing, and thermal pro-
tection are sought. These materials may be expected to perform in a hostile space environment, thus requiring 
atomic oxygen and radiation resistance as well as long-term durability under conditions that may include severe 
thermal cycling. Developments are needed for proof-of-concept demonstrations for unique, multifunction mate-
rials and structures for aerospace applications. Metal systems typically require surface modifications and/or 
treatment for protection in aggressive, high temperature, highly oxidative environments. Approaches are needed 
for tailored surface microstructures and coatings for environmental protection and thermal control on a variety 
of space transportation vehicles. Revolutionary approaches are needed for adaptive self-healing surfaces with 
the ability to sense, identify and repair damage.







8.2.4  Launch and Payload Processing Systems
NASA Installation:  Kennedy Space Center

In support of the strategic development of NASA's Technology Plan, the Center of Excellence for Launch and Pay-
load Processing Systems is continually advancing the state of the art in launch and payload processing hardware, 
software, and support activities. Development of innovative technologies needed to improve operational safety and 
reliability, reduce costs and shorten flight hardware processing turnaround times is critical to NASA's continued 
excellence in launch and payload processing. NASA's goals to achieve affordable access to space require greater 
efficiencies in ground operations for current and future space flight vehicles and payloads. The four primary goals of 
the Center of Excellence are to (1) assure that sound, safe, and efficient practices and processes are in place for 
privatized/commercialized launch site operations; (2) increase the use of KSC's operations expertise to contribute to 
the design and development of new payloads and launch vehicles; (3) utilize KSC's operations expertise in partner-
ship with other entities (government, industry, academia) to develop new technologies for future space initiatives; 
and (4) continually embrace core capabilities (people, facilities, equipment, and systems) to meet agency objectives 
and customer needs for faster, better, and cheaper development and operations of space systems. 
Core technology challenges to support this Center of Excellence for this Solicitation include: 

Spaceport Range Technologies
Proposals should address the development of new concepts, methodologies, processes and technologies that may be 
applied to or are specific to Spaceport Range needs. Specific topic areas are: 

? Weather Instrumentation and Systems: Research new and innovative sensors’ instrumentation and system 
technologies that support the detection and real-time evaluation of atmospheric conditions that influence 
weather related decisions. These include remote sensing of atmospheric conditions; methods and algorithms for 
accurate predictions; multi-spectral instrumentation; and complex computational systems that affect the safety 
of launch and landing operations, and vehicle performance during these phases.
? Spaceport Range Systems:  New and innovative technologies that include ground-based sensors and instru-
mentation that would safely reduce the required support infrastructure and personnel. Specific areas of need are 
metric tracking of vehicles, communications, navigational aids, detection of air and sea traffic, and weather sen-
sors (see above). These sensors and instruments are intended to be complementary to the SBR (see below) and 
would be required to detect and monitor surface conditions by increasing the overall system resolution and ac-
curacy and integrating the data. 
? Space Based Range (SBR):  New and innovative in-space technologies that provide for simultaneous support 
of multiple vehicle operations at the same or other ranges/spaceports from space platforms. This will include the 
development of technologies for sensors and instrumentation systems that perform or support the following 
functions: metric tracking, area surveillance, navigation aids, and atmospheric sensing. Each of these functions 
will require development of one or more of the following technologies; Integrated multi-, hyper-, and ultra-
spectral instrumentation and sensors; Multi-channel transceivers. These will provide directors/controllers and 
vehicles vital real-time data that is necessary to interface with the National Airspace System for all phases of 
ascent and decent.
? Decision Models and Simulation:  New and innovative methods that safely reduce conservatism while pro-
viding the fidelity necessary to ensure safe and cost effective real-time decision models. Improvements in real-
time computational capability and code development can significantly improve assessments. Specific technolo-
gies that would be necessary are: 
-  Parallel processing enhancements associated with source term quantification will provide significant increases 
in performance. 
-  Modeling code improvements will increase fidelity and improve understanding of potential problems. 
-  Active model validation approach and simulators would be employed to ensure improvements have scientific 
merit and quantify model performance. 
? Range Information Systems Management:  New and innovative communications methods, standards and 
technologies that support the integration and management of geographically and functionally distributed in-
strumentation and computational systems into an integrated Spaceport(s) Range system.
? Command, Control and Monitoring:  New and Innovative technologies that include real-time advisory sys-
tems for the operators and users; data reduction, analysis, and archiving; configuration validation and 
management; and low cost high fidelity training capabilities that minimize impact to operational systems. 
Process Engineering
Proposals should address the development of new concepts, methodologies, processes, and/or software support 
systems that advance the state-of-the-art in process engineering technologies. Specific areas of emphasis include, but 
are not limited to, those topics listed below: 

? Systems, Process, and Operations Modeling, and Simulation and Analysis:  New technologies must be 
developed and existing technologies improved in the area of ground processing assessments for any future 
launch vehicles including both Expendable Launch Vehicle (ELV) and Reusable Launch System (RLS), devel-
opment and assessment of Mars/moon surface operations, sparing analysis for human Mars/moon missions, 
discrete event simulation and modeling and analysis techniques, automated process simulation and processing 
systems and virtual shuttle processing models. 
? Human Factors (HF) Engineering: Innovative research is needed in the area of assessments on the human 
Mars/moon vehicle design, application of HF principles early in the design stages of systems to prevent and re-
duce human error, perform usability testing on systems and prototypes, development of advanced intelligent 
training systems and wireless communication headsets.
? Process Design and Development:  There is a need for advanced technologies to be developed in the area of 
optimization of new processes, knowledge capture systems, work instruction systems, and management support 
systems. 
? Work Methods/Measurement:  Research is needed in the advancement of tools to assist in the development 
and assessment of crew timelines for human Mars/moon missions and work methods and measurement tech-
niques.
? Scheduling/Capacity Analysis:  New technologies must be developed in the area of assessments of crew time-
lines for human Mars/moon missions from the perspective of expected maintenance demands versus allocated 
crew time to perform maintenance, advanced resource and schedule optimization systems, and smart storage 
and inventory systems.
? Risk and System Assessment:  Innovative research must be developed in the area of identification of enhanced 
risk assessment techniques from a systems integration perspective, lessons learned database, application of 
safety hazard analysis, failure mode effects analysis (FMEA) and critical items list (CIL), fault tree analysis, re-
liability, maintainability and availability predictions (mean time between failures (MTBF), mean time to repair 
(MTTR), etc.). Additional enhancements needed in generating quantitative risk assessments such as Fault Tree 
Analyses linked to an Event Tree serving as a pivotal event timeline (provides the probability of loss of vehicle 
or crew and detail component failures, which lead to this undesirable event.). 

Regenerative Environmental Technologies
Proposals are solicited for innovative and commercially viable technologies in environmental monitoring and man-
agement of bioregenerative life support systems. Of particular emphasis is the development of systems or sensors to 
monitor functionality of a bioregenerative system and critical technologies for effective operation of the managed 
environment of a plant growth chamber. Specific topic areas are: 

? Functionality Monitoring for Bioregenerative Life Support 
-  Microbial: Innovative technologies for monitoring microbial populations in prototype systems under devel-
opment at Kennedy Space Center are needed for better understanding the microbial community structure and 
function. Techniques are sought for rapid (real-time) identification and monitoring of the microbial ecology 
within hydroponic and bioreactor systems. Quantification of population size, species richness, community 
composition, microdiversity, and microbial growth are of particular interest. Techniques for direct analysis of 
microbial diversity without culturing are also desired. 
-  Plant Health: Novel techniques for automatic/remote detection of plant stresses are sought for use in plant 
growth chambers using lighting systems. Plants stresses to be identified include but are not limited to changes 
in atmospheric components and perturbations of hydroponic solutions such as nutrient deficiencies and toxic-
ity's and microbial anomalies. Stress detection technique should preclude human intervention, i.e., robot and 
neural net recognition programming. 
? Technologies for Closed Plant Growth Systems 
-  Lighting Systems: Light sources which have a significant life cycle while also providing high electrical con-
version efficiencies greater than 50 percent and producing an optimized radiation spectrum (e.g., 80 percent 
in 580-700nm and 20 percent in 400-480nm) for plant photosynthetic processes are highly sought. Innovative 
methods for transferring/distributing light energy to the plant canopy (leaf surfaces) with minimal loss are 
also desired. 
-  Nutrient Monitoring: On-line and real-time monitoring of inorganic ions in plant nutrient solutions are de-
sired. Simultaneous monitoring and quantification of nitrogen, phosphorous, potassium, calcium, chlorine, 
magnesium, sulfur, zinc, manganese, iron, boron, copper, and molybdenum are preferred. 
-  Atmospheric Monitoring: Real-time monitoring of the constituents of the chamber environment may be very 
helpful in identifying a negative trend in plant growth and allow corrective action if such parameters are 
found to be heading towards unfavorable limits. Desired measurements include but are no limited to: air tem-
perature, air velocity, radiation, and the concentrations of the following atmospheric constituents: water, 
carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide nitrous oxide, gaseous nitrogen, oxygen, ammonia, ethylene, and argon. 
Low power, low mass, self-calibrating sensors as part of an overall sensor web are preferred.












This page has intentionally been left blank.



9.  Submission Forms And Certifications

	
9.1     SBIR FORMS AND CERTIFICATIONS	150

9.1.1  FORM 9A – SBIR Proposal Cover 	150
9.1.2  FORM 9B – SBIR Proposal Summary	153
9.1.3  FORM 9C – SBIR Summary Budget	155
9.1.4  SBIR Check List	158

9.2     STTR FORMS AND CERTIFICATIONS	159

9.2.1  FORM 9A – STTR Proposal Cover	159
9.2.2  FORM 9B – STTR Proposal Summary	162
9.2.3  FORM 9C – STTR Summary Budget	164
9.2.4  Model Cooperative Agreement	167
9.2.5  Model Allocation of Rights Agreement	168
9.2.6  STTR Check List	172

	



FORM 9A – SBIR PROPOSAL COVER


						     	        Subtopic Number		
1.	PROPOSAL NUMBER:      	 01-           .          		                         		

2.	SUBTOPIC TITLE:

3.	PROPOSAL TITLE:

4.	SMALL BUSINESS CONCERN (SBC):
	NAME:
	MAILING ADDRESS:
	CITY/STATE/ZIP:
	PHONE:
	FAX:
	EIN/TAX ID:							DUNS + 4:			CAGE CODE:
	NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES:

5.	AMOUNT REQUESTED $  			             	DURATION:  		 MONTHS           


6.	CERTIFICATIONS:  OFFEROR CERTIFIES THAT:


As defined in Section 1 of the Solicitation, the offeror certifies:
a.  Eligibility of the Principal Investigator	Yes	No
As defined in Section 2 of the Solicitation, the offeror qualifies as a:
    b.  SBC 	Yes	No
	 Number of employees: _____
	c.  Socially and economically disadvantaged SBC	Yes	No
	d.  Woman-owned SBC	Yes	No
As described in Section 3 of this solicitation, the offeror meets the following requirements completely:
	e.  All eleven parts of the technical proposal included in part order	Yes	No
	f.  Subcontracts/consultants proposed?	Yes	No
		i) If yes, limits on subcontracts/consultants met	Yes	No 
		ii) If yes, copy of agreement enclosed	Yes	No
	g.  Government equipment or facilities required?	Yes	No
		i) If yes, signed statement enclosed in Part 8	Yes	No


7.	ACN NAME:						E-MAIL:

8.	ENDORSEMENTS:

	PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:				CORPORATE BUSINESS OFFICIAL:

	NAME:						NAME:
	TITLE:						TITLE:
	PHONE:						PHONE:
	E-MAIL:						E-MAIL:
	SIGNATURE:					SIGNATURE:
	DATE:						DATE:

NOTICE: For any purpose other than to evaluate the proposal, this data shall not be disclosed outside the Government and shall not be duplicated, 
used, or disclosed in whole or in part, provided that if a funding agreement is awarded to this proposer as a result of or in connection with the 
submission of these data, the Government shall have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the funding 
agreement. This restriction does not limit the Government's right to use Information contained in the data if it is obtained from another source 
without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained in pages __________ of this proposal

Guidelines for Completing SBIR Proposal Cover

1.	Proposal Number:  This number does not change even if the firm gets a new phone number.  Complete the 
proposal number as follows:

	1.  Enter the four-digit subtopic number.  
   	2.  Enter the four digits system generated numbers

2.	Subtopic Title:  Enter the title of the subtopic that this proposal will address.  Use abbreviations as needed.  

3.	Proposal Title:  Enter a brief, descriptive title using no more than 80 keystrokes (characters and spaces).  Do not 
use the subtopic title.  Avoid words like "development" and "study".

4.	Small Business Concern:  Enter the full name of the company submitting the proposal.  If a joint venture, list 
the company chosen to negotiate and receive contracts.  If the name exceeds 40 keystrokes, please abbreviate.

Address:			Address where mail is received
	City:			City name 
	State:			2-letter State designation (example VA for Virginia)
	Zip:				9-digit Zip code (example 20705-3106)
       	Phone:			Number including area code
	Fax:				Number including area code
	EIN/Tax ID:			Employer Identification Number/Taxpayer ID
	DUNS + 4:			9-digit Data Universal Number System plus a 4-digit suffix given by parent 
concern
	CAGE Code:	Commercial Government and Entity Code (Issued by Central Contractor 
Registration (CCR))
	
5.	Amount Requested:  Proposal amount from Budget Summary.  The amount requested should not exceed 
$70,000; round to nearest dollar; do not enter cents (see Sections 1.4.1, 5.1.1).

Duration:  Proposed duration in months.  The requested duration should not exceed 6 months (see Sections 
1.4.1, 5.1.1).

6.	Certifications:  Answer Yes or No as applicable for 6a, 6b, 6c, 6d and 6e (see Sections 1 and 2 for definitions)

6f.   Subcontracts/consultants proposed?  By answering yes, the SBC certifies that subcontracts/consultants have 
been proposed and arrangements have been made to perform on the contract, if awarded. 

i)	If yes, limits on subcontracting and consultants met:  By answering yes, the SBC certifies that business 
arrangements with other entities or individuals do not exceed one-third of the work (amount requested 
including cost sharing if any, less fee, if any) and is in compliance with Section 3.2.4, Part 9

ii)	If yes, copy of agreement enclosed:  By answering yes, the SBC certifies that a copy of any 
subcontracting or consulting agreements described in Section 3.2.4 Part 9 is included as required. Copy 
of the agreement may be submitted in a reduced size format.

6g.  Government furnished equipment required?  By answering yes, the SBC certifies that unique, one-of-a-kind 
Government Furnished Facilities or Government Furnished Equipment are required to perform the         
proposed activities (see Sections 3.2.4 Part 8, 3.3 Part 7, 5.17).  By answering no, the SBC certifies that no 
such Government Furnished Facilities or Government Furnished Equipment are required to perform the 
proposed activities.  

i)	  If yes, signed statement enclosed in Part 8: By answering yes, the SBC certifies that a statement  
describing the uniqueness of the facility and its availability to the offeror at specified times, signed by 
the appropriate Government official is enclosed in the proposal.

7.	ACN Name and E-mail:  Name and e-mail address of Authorized Contract Negotiator

8.	Endorsements:  The proposal cover must be signed by an official of the firm and proposed Principal   
Investigator

The Proposal Cover is submitted with original signatures in paper form to NASA with the proposal.


FORM 9B – SBIR PROPOSAL SUMMARY
  


						     Subtopic Number			

1.	PROPOSAL NUMBER       01-           .          	                        

2.	SUBTOPIC TITLE 	

3.	PROPOSAL TITLE

4.	SMALL BUSINESS CONCERN
	NAME:
	ADDRESS:
	CITY/STATE:
	ZIP:
	PHONE:

5.	PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR/PROJECT MANAGER
	NAME:
	ADDRESS:
	CITY/STATE:
	ZIP:
	PHONE:
  
6.	TECHNICAL ABSTRACT (LIMIT 200 WORDS):















7.	POTENTIAL COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS (LIMIT 200 WORDS):
















Guidelines for Completing SBIR Proposal Summary


Complete Form 9B electronically and print a copy for second page of the proposal. 

1.  	Proposal Number:  Same as Proposal Cover.

2.  	Subtopic Title:  Same as Proposal Cover.
  
3.  	Proposal Title:  Same as Proposal Cover. 
        
4.  	Small Business Concern:  Same as Proposal Cover.

5.  	Principal Investigator/Project Manager:  Same as Proposal Cover

6.  	Technical Abstract:  Summary of the offeror’s proposed project in 200 words or less.  The abstract must not 
contain proprietary information and must describe the NASA need addressed by the proposed R/R&D effort.
  
7.  	Potential Commercial Application(s):  Summary of the direct or indirect commercial potential of the project,  
assuming the goals of the proposed R/R&D are achieved. Limit your response to 200 words. 





FORM 9C – SBIR SUMMARY BUDGET


PROPOSAL NUMBER:

SMALL BUSINESS CONCERN:			

													
DIRECT LABOR:
Category			Hours		Rate	Cost
						$



						TOTAL DIRECT LABOR: 
(1)	$   		              

OVERHEAD COST
______% of Total Direct Labor or $ ______
						OVERHEAD COST:	
(2)	$   		

OTHER DIRECT COSTS (ODCs):
Category						Cost
						
						$

						TOTAL OTHER DIRECT COSTS:
						(3)	$  		


(1)+(2)+(3)=(4)					SUBTOTAL:			
						(4)	$   		  


GENERAL & ADMINISTRATIVE (G&A) COSTS
______% of Subtotal or $ ______			G&A COSTS:
						(5)	$   		


(4)+(5)=(6)					TOTAL COSTS			
						(6)	$   		


ADD PROFIT or SUBTRACT COST SHARING	PROFIT/COST SHARING:
(As applicable)					(7)	$   		


(6)+(7)=(8)					AMOUNT REQUESTED:
						(8)	$   		



Guidelines for Preparing SBIR Summary Budget

The offeror submits to the Government a pricing proposal of estimated costs with detailed information for each cost 
element, consistent with the offeror's cost accounting system.  Prepare electronically, print and sign a paper copy for 
submission to NASA with the proposal.

This summary does not eliminate the need to fully document and justify the amounts requested in each category. 
Such documentation should be contained, as appropriate, on a budget explanation page immediately following the 
summary budget in the proposal. 

Firm:  Same as Proposal Cover.

Proposal Number:  Same as Proposal Cover.

Direct Labor:  Enter labor categories proposed (e.g., Principal Investigator/Project Manager, Research 
Assistant/laboratory assistant, Analyst, administrative staff), labor rates and the hours for each labor category.

Overhead Cost:  Specify current rate and base. Use current rate(s) negotiated with the cognizant federal auditing 
agency, if available. If no rate(s) has (have) been negotiated, a reasonable indirect cost (overhead) rate(s) may be 
requested for Phase I for acceptance by NASA. Show how this rate is determined. The offeror may use whatever 
number and types of overhead rates that are in accordance with the firm's accounting system and approved by the 
cognizant federal negotiating agency, if available. Multiply Direct Labor Cost by the Overhead Rate to determine 
the Overhead Cost.

Example: A typical SBC might have an overhead rate of 30 percent.  If the total direct labor costs proposed are 
$50,000, the computed overhead costs for this case would be .3x50,000=$15,000, if the base used is the total direct 
labor costs. 

or provide a number for total estimated overhead costs to execute the project.

Other Direct Costs (ODCs): 
- Materials and Supplies: Indicate types required and estimate costs.
- Documentation Costs or Page Charges: Estimate cost of preparing and publishing project results.
- Subcontracts: Include a completed budget including hours and rates and justify details. (Section 3.2.4, Part 
9.)
- Consultant Services: Indicate name, daily compensation, and estimated days of service. 
- Computer Services: Computer equipment leasing is included here.  

List all other direct costs that are not otherwise included in the categories described above.  

Subtotal (4):  Sum of (1) Total Direct Labor, (2) Overhead and (3) ODCs

General and Administrative (G&A) Costs (5):  Specify current rate and base.  Use current rate negotiated with 
the cognizant federal negotiating agency, if available.  If no rate has been negotiated, a reasonable indirect cost 
(G&A) rate may be requested for acceptance by NASA.  Show how this rate is determined.  If a current negotiated 
rate is not available, NASA will negotiate a reasonable rate with the offeror.  Multiply (4) subtotal (Total Direct 
Cost) by the G&A rate to determine G&A Cost. 

or provide an estimated G&A costs number for the proposal.

Total Costs (6):  Sum of Items (4) and (5). Note that this value will be used in verifying the minimum required 
work percentage for the SBC.

Profit/Cost Sharing (7):  See Sections 5.11 and 5.12.  Profit to be added to total budget, shared costs to be 
subtracted from total budget, as applicable.



Amount Requested (8):  Sum of Items (6) and (7), not to exceed $70,000.




SBIR CHECK LIST


For assistance in completing your proposal, use the following checklist to ensure your submission is complete.

1.	The entire proposal including any supplemental material shall not exceed a total of 25 8.5 x 11 inch pages, 
(Section 3.2.1).

2.	The proposal and innovation is submitted for one subtopic only.  (Section 3.1).

3.	The entire proposal is submitted consistent with the requirements and in the order outlined in Section 3.2

4.	The technical proposal contains all eleven parts in order.  (Section 3.2.4).  

5.	Certifications in Form 9A are completed.

6.	Proposed funding does not exceed $70,000.  (Sections 1.4.1, 5.1.1).

7.	Proposed project duration should not exceed 6 months.  (Sections 1.4.1, 5.1.1).

8.	Printed version of Forms 9A, 9B and 9C included in the postal submission.  

9.	Postal submission includes an original signed proposal with all forms (Section 6.3).

10.	Entire proposal including Forms 9A, 9B and 9C submitted via the Internet.

11.	Internet submission must be consistent with Postal submission.  

12.	Proposals must be received by the NASA SBIR/STTR Program Support Office no later than 5:00 p.m. EDT on 
Wednesday, June 6, 2001.  (Section 6.3.3).  

 

FORM 9A – STTR PROPOSAL COVER


									Topic Number		
1.	PROPOSAL NUMBER:      	 01-           .          		 
									 
2.	RESEARCH TOPIC: 

3.	PROPOSAL TITLE:  

4.	SMALL BUSINESS CONCERN (SBC)			RESEARCH INSTITUTION (RI)
	NAME:						NAME:
	ADDRESS: 						ADDRESS:
	CITY/STATE/ZIP:					CITY/STATE/ZIP	: 
	PHONE:						PHONE:
	FAX:						FAX:
 	EIN/TAX ID:						EIN/TAX ID:
	DUNS + 4:		CAGE CODE:
	
5.	AMOUNT REQUESTED:  $_____________________    	DURATION:  _________ MONTHS

6.	CERTIFICATIONS: THE ABOVE SBC AND RI CERTIFY THAT

As defined in Section 2 of the Solicitation, the offeror qualifies as a:
       a.	SBC	Yes	No
		Number of employees:  ____
	b.	RI	Yes 	No
	c.	Socially and economically disadvantaged SBC	Yes	No
	d.	Woman-owned SBC	Yes	No
As described in Section 3 of this solicitation, the offeror meets the following requirements completely:
	e.	Cooperative Agreement signed by the SBC and RI enclosed	Yes	No
	f.	All eleven parts of the technical proposal included in part order	Yes	No
	g.	Subcontracts/consultants proposed?	Yes	No
		i) If yes, limits on subcontracts/consultants met	Yes	No 
		ii) If yes, copy of agreement enclosed	Yes	No
	h.	Government equipment or facilities required?	Yes	No
		i) If yes, signed statement enclosed in Part 8	Yes	No

7.	ACN NAME:			E-MAIL: 

8.	THE SBC WILL PERFORM ___% OF THE WORK AND THE RI WILL PERFORM ___% OF THE WORK OF 
THIS PROJECT.

9.	 ENDORSEMENTS:

	SBC OFFICIAL:			PI/PM: 				RI OFFICIAL:
	NAME:				NAME:				NAME:
	TITLE:				EMPLOYER:			TITLE:
	PHONE:	 			PHONE:				PHONE:  
	E-MAIL:				E-MAIL:				E-MAIL:
	SIGNATURE:				SIGNATURE:			SIGNATURE:
	DATE:				DATE:				DATE:

NOTICE:  For any purpose other than to evaluate the proposal, this data shall not be disclosed outside the government and shall not be 
duplicated, used, or disclosed in whole or in part, provided that, if a funding agreement is awarded to this proposer as a result of or in connection 
with the submission of these data, the Government shall have the right to duplicate, use, or disclose the data to the extent provided in the funding 
agreement. This restriction does not limit the Government's right to use information contained in the data if it is obtained from another source 
without restriction. The data subject to this restriction are contained in pages _____ of this proposal. 

Guidelines for Completing STTR Proposal Cover


General:  Complete Form 9A electronically by following the instructions provided in the electronic handbook. Print 
one copy of Form 9A and sign it manually.  This will be the signed cover sheet for the paper copy of the proposal to 
be submitted to NASA along with the internet submission (see Sections 3.2, 6.2 for further instructions.)

1.	Proposal Number:  This number does not change even if the firm gets a new phone number.  Complete the 
proposal number as follows:
	
1. Enter the four-digit Topic number.
2. Enter the four digits system generated numbers	

2.	Research Topic: NASA research topic number and title (Section 8).

3.	Proposal Title:  A brief, descriptive title, avoid words like "development of" and "study of" and do not use 
acronyms or trade names.

4.	Small Business Concern:  Full name and address of the company submitting the proposal.  If a joint venture, 
list the company chosen to negotiate and receive contracts.  If the name exceeds 40 keystrokes, please 
abbreviate.
        
	Research Institution:  Full name and address of the research institute.

Mailing Address:		Address where mail is received
		City:			City name		
State:	2-letter State designation (example VA for Virginia)
Zip:	9-digit Zip code (example 20705-3106)
       	Phone:			Number including area code
		Fax:				Number including area code
		EIN/TAX ID:		Employer Identification Number/Taxpayer ID
		DUNS + 4:			9-digit Data Universal Number System plus a 4-digit suffix given by 
parent concern		
		CAGE Code:			Commercial Government and Entity Code (Issued by Central 
Contractor Registration (CCR)
		
5.	Amount Requested:  Proposal amount from Budget Summary.  The amount requested should not exceed 
$100,000; round to nearest dollar; do not enter cents (see Sections 1.4.1, 5.1.1).

Duration:  Proposed duration in months.  The requested duration should not exceed 12 months (see Sections 
1.4.1, 5.1.1).

6.	Certifications: Answer Yes or No as applicable for 5a, 5b, 5c, and 5d (see Section 2 for definitions)

5e.	Cooperative Agreement signed by the SBC and RI: By answering yes, the SBC/RI certifies that a 
Cooperative Agreement signed by both SBC and RI is enclosed in the proposal (see Sections 3.2.2, 3.2.6).

	5f.	All eleven parts of the technical proposal included:  By answering yes, the SBC/RI certifies that the 
proposal consists of all eleven parts numbered and in the prescribed order (see Section 3.2.4).

	5g.	Subcontracts/consultants proposed?  By answering yes, the SBC/RI certifies that subcontracts/consultants 
have been proposed and arrangements have been made to perform on the contract, if awarded. 

i)	If yes, limits on subcontracting and consultants met:  By answering yes, the SBC/RI certifies that 
business arrangements with other entities or individuals do not exceed 30 percent of the work 
(amount requested including cost sharing if any, less fee, if any) and is in compliance with Section 
3.2.4, Part 9

ii)	If yes, copy of agreement enclosed:  By answering yes, the SBC/RI certifies that a copy of any 
subcontracting or consulting agreements described in Section 3.2.4 Part 9 is included as required. 
Copy of the agreement may be submitted in a reduced size format.

	5h.	Government furnished equipment required?  By answering yes, the SBC/RI certifies that unique, one-of-
a-kind Government Furnished Facilities or Government Furnished Equipment are required to perform the 
proposed activities (see Sections 3.2.4 Part 8, 3.3 Part 7, 5.17).  By answering no, the SBC/RI certifies 
that no such Government Furnished Facilities or Government Furnished Equipment are required to 
perform the proposed activities.  

		i)	If yes, signed statement enclosed in Part 8: By answering yes, the SBC/RI certifies that a statement 
describing the uniqueness of the facility and its availability to the offeror at specified times, signed by 
the appropriate Government official is enclosed in the proposal.
	
7.	ACN Name and E-mail: Name and e-mail address of Authorized Contract Negotiator.

8.	Proposals submitted in response to this Solicitation must be jointly developed by the SBC and the RI, and at 
least 40 percent of the work (amount requested including cost sharing, less fee, if any) is to be performed by 
the SBC as the prime contractor, and at least 30 percent of the work is to be performed by the RI (see Section 
1.1).

9.	Endorsements:  The proposal cover must be signed by an official of the firm, proposed Principal 
Investigator/Project Manager and the RI Official. 

The Proposal Cover is submitted with original signatures in paper form to NASA with the proposal.




FORM 9B – STTR PROPOSAL SUMMARY
  

					                      Topic Number			

1.	PROPOSAL NUMBER       01-             .           .        
  
2.		RESEARCH TOPIC:   
  
3.		PROPOSAL TITLE:  
  
4. 	SMALL BUSINESS CONCERN				5.   RESEARCH INSTITUTION  
	NAME:	NAME:					
	ADDRESS:	ADDRESS:
	CITY/STATE:	CITY/STATE:
	ZIP:	ZIP:
	PHONE:	PHONE:
  
6.	PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR/PROJECT MANAGER:
	       
7.	TECHNICAL ABSTRACT (LIMIT 200 WORDS):  
  
  
  















  

  
8.	POTENTIAL COMMERCIAL APPLICATION(S) (LIMIT 200 WORDS):




 







Guidelines for Completing STTR Proposal Summary



Complete Form 9B electronically and print a copy for second page of the proposal. 

1.	Proposal Number:  Same as Proposal Cover

2.	Research Topic: Same as Proposal Cover.
  
3.	Proposal Title: Same as Proposal Cover. 
        
4.	Small Business Concern: Same as Proposal Cover.

5.	Research Institution: Same as Proposal Cover.  
  
6.	Principal Investigator/Project Manager: Same as Proposal Cover.  
 
7.	Technical Abstract:  Summary of the offeror’s proposed project in 200 words or less.  The abstract must not 
contain proprietary information and must describe the NASA need addressed by the proposed R/R&D effort.
  
8.	Potential Commercial Application(s):  Summary of the direct or indirect commercial potential of the 
project, assuming the goals of the proposed R/R&D are achieved. Limit your response to 200 words. 


FORM 9C – STTR SUMMARY BUDGET


PROPOSAL NUMBER:

SMALL BUSINESS CONCERN:			PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR/PROJECT MANAGER:

													
DIRECT LABOR:
Category			Hours		Rate	Cost
						$



						TOTAL DIRECT LABOR: 
(1)	$   		              

OVERHEAD COST
______% of Total Direct Labor or $ ______
						OVERHEAD COST:	
(2)	$   		

OTHER DIRECT COSTS (ODCs):
Category						Cost
						
						$

						TOTAL OTHER DIRECT COSTS:
						(3)	$  		


(1)+(2)+(3)=(4)					SUBTOTAL:			
						(4)	$   		  


GENERAL & ADMINISTRATIVE (G&A) COSTS
______% of Subtotal or $ ______			G&A COSTS:
						(5)	$   		


(4)+(5)=(6)					TOTAL COSTS			
						(6)	$   		


ADD PROFIT or SUBTRACT COST SHARING	PROFIT/COST SHARING:
(As applicable)					(7)	$   		


(6)+(7)=(8)					AMOUNT REQUESTED:
						(8)	$   		







Guidelines for Preparing STTR Summary Budget


The offeror submits to the Government a pricing proposal of estimated costs with detailed information for each cost 
element, consistent with the offeror's cost accounting system.  Prepare electronically, print and sign a paper copy for 
submission to NASA with the proposal.

This summary does not eliminate the need to fully document and justify the amounts requested in each category. 
Such documentation should be contained, as appropriate, on a budget explanation page immediately following the 
summary budget in the proposal. 

Small Business Concern - Same as Proposal Cover.

Principal Investigator/Project Manager - Same as Proposal Cover.

Direct Labor - Enter labor categories proposed (e.g., Principal Investigator/Project Manager, Research 
Assistant/laboratory assistant, Analyst, administrative staff), labor rates and the hours for each labor category.

Overhead Cost - Specify current rate and base. Use current rate(s) negotiated with the cognizant federal auditing 
agency, if available. If no rate(s) has (have) been audited, a reasonable indirect cost (overhead) rate(s) may be 
requested for Phase I for acceptance by NASA. Show how this rate is determined.  The offeror may use whatever 
number and types of overhead rates that are in accordance with the firm's accounting system and approved by the 
cognizant federal negotiating agency, if available. Multiply Direct Labor Cost by the Overhead Rate to determine 
the Overhead Cost.

Example: A typical SBC might have an overhead rate of 30%.  If the total direct labor costs proposed are $50,000, 
the computed overhead costs for this case would be .3x50,000=$15,000, if the base used is the total direct labor 
costs. 

or provide a number for total estimated overhead costs to execute the project.

Other Direct Costs (ODCs) - (Include budget for the Research Institution as a Other Direct Cost.)
- Materials and Supplies: Indicate types required and estimate costs.
- Documentation Costs or Page Charges: Estimate cost of preparing and publishing project results.
- Subcontracts: Include a completed budget including hours and rates and justify details. (Section 3.2.4, Part 9.)
- Consultant Services: Indicate name, daily compensation, and estimated days of service. 
- Computer Services: Computer equipment leasing is included here.  

List all other direct costs that are not otherwise included in the categories described above.  

Subtotal (4)  - Sum of (1) Total Direct Labor, (2) Overhead and (3) ODCs

General and Administrative (G&A) Costs (5)- Specify current rate and base.  Use current rate negotiated with 
the cognizant federal negotiating agency, if available.  If no rate has been negotiated, a reasonable indirect cost 
(G&A) rate may be requested for acceptance by NASA.  If a current negotiated rate is not available, NASA will 
negotiate a reasonable rate with the offeror.  Multiply (4) subtotal (Total Direct Cost) by the G&A rate to determine 
G&A Cost. 

or provide an estimated G&A costs number for the proposal.

Total Costs (6) - Sum of Items (4) and (5). Note that this value will be used in verifying the minimum required 
work percentage for the SBC and RI.

Profit/Cost Sharing (7) - See Sections 5.11 and 5.12.  Profit to be added to total budget, shared costs to be 
subtracted from total budget, as applicable.


Amount Requested (8) - Sum of Items (6) and (7), not to exceed $100,000.

Name and Title of SBC Official:				

Signature and Date


                                                              MODEL COOPERATIVE AGREEMENT



	By virtue of the signatures of our authorized representatives, 		(Small Business Concern),         and 
				(Research Institution)				 have agreed to cooperate 
on the 		(Proposal Title)		 Project, in accordance with the proposal being submitted with this 
agreement.

	This agreement shall be binding until the completion of all Phase I activities, at a minimum.  If the		
	(Proposal Title)		 Project is selected to continue into Phase II, the agreement may also be binding 
in Phase II activities that are funded by NASA, then this agreement shall be binding until those activities are 
completed.  The agreement may also be binding in Phase III activities that are funded by NASA.

	After notification of Phase I selection and prior to contract release, we shall prepare and submit, if 
requested by NASA, an Allocation of Rights Agreement, which shall state our rights to the intellectual property 
and technology to be developed and commercialized by the 			(Proposal Title)		 Project. 
We understand that our contract cannot be approved and project activities may not commence until the Allocation 
of Rights Agreement has been signed and certified to NASA.

	Please direct all questions and comments to 			(Small Business Concern representative) at 	
	(Phone Number)   		



	Signature			

	Name/title			


	Small Business Concern		

	Signature			

	Name/title			

	Research Institution		



SMALL BUSINESS TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER (STTR) PROGRAM
                                              MODEL ALLOCATION OF RIGHTS AGREEMENT


This Agreement between _________________________________________, a small business concern organized as 
a _________________________ under the laws of _________________ and having a principal place of business at 
___________________________________________________________________________________________ 
____________________, ("SBC") and __________________________________________________, a research 
institution having a principal place of business at __________________________ _________________,("RI") is 
entered into for the purpose of allocating between the parties certain rights relating to an STTR project to be carried 
out by SBC and RI (hereinafter referred to as the "PARTIES") under an STTR funding agreement that may be 
awarded by _NASA________ to SBC to fund a proposal entitled "___________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________________" submitted, or to be 
submitted, to by SBC on or about __________________________, 200___.

1.  Applicability of this Agreement.

	(a) This Agreement shall be applicable only to matters relating to the STTR project referred to in the 
preamble above.
         
	(b) If a funding agreement for STTR project is awarded to SBC based upon the STTR proposal referred to 
in the preamble above, SBC will promptly provide a copy of such funding agreement to RI, and SBC will make a 
sub-award to RI in accordance with the funding agreement, the proposal, and this Agreement.  If the terms of such 
funding agreement appear to be inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement, the Parties will attempt in good 
faith to resolve any such inconsistencies. 

However, if such resolution is not achieved within a reasonable period, SBC shall not be obligated to award nor RI 
to accept the sub-award.  If a sub-award is made by SBC and accepted by RI, this Agreement shall not be applicable 
to contradict the terms of such sub-award or of the funding agreement awarded by NASA to SBC except on the 
grounds of fraud, misrepresentation, or mistake, but shall be considered to resolve ambiguities in the terms of the 
sub-award.
         
	(c) The provisions of this Agreement shall apply to any and all consultants, subcontractors, independent 
contractors, or other individuals employed by SBC or RI for the purposes of this STTR project.

2.  Background Intellectual Property.

	(a)  "Background Intellectual Property" means property and the legal right therein of either or both parties 
developed before or independent of this Agreement including inventions, patent applications, patents, copyrights, 
trademarks, mask works, trade secrets and any information embodying proprietary data such as technical data and 
computer software.

	(b) This Agreement shall not be construed as implying that either party hereto shall have the right to use 
Background Intellectual Property of the other in connection with this STTR project except as otherwise provided 
hereunder. 
		(1) The following Background Intellectual Property of SBC may be used nonexclusively and, 
except as noted, without compensation by RI in connection with research or development activities for this STTR 
project (if "none" so state):_______________________________________________________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________;

		(2) The following Background Intellectual Property of RI may be used nonexclusively and, except 
as noted, without compensation by SBC in connection with research or development activities for this STTR project 
(if "none" so state): 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________;

		(3) The following Background Intellectual Property of RI may be used by SBC nonexclusively in 
connection with commercialization of the results of this STTR project, to the extent that such use is reasonably 
necessary for practical, efficient and competitive commercialization of such results but not for commercialization 
independent of the commercialization of such results, subject to any rights of the Government therein and upon the 
condition that SBC pay to RI, in addition to any other royalty including any royalty specified in the following list, a 
royalty of _____% of net sales or leases made by or under the authority of SBC of any product or service that 
embodies, or the manufacture or normal use of which entails the use of, all or any part of such Background 
Intellectual Property (if "none" so state): 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________.

3.  Project Intellectual Property.
 
	(a) "Project Intellectual Property" means the legal rights relating to inventions (including Subject 
Inventions as defined in 37 CFR § 401), patent applications, patents, copyrights, trademarks, mask works, trade 
secrets and any other legally protectable information, including computer software, first made or generated during 
the performance of this STTR Agreement.

	(b) Except as otherwise provided herein, ownership of Project Intellectual Property shall vest in the party 
whose personnel conceived the subject matter, and such party may perfect legal protection in its own name and at its 
own expense.  Jointly made or generated Project Intellectual Property shall be jointly owned by the Parties unless 
otherwise agreed in writing.  The SBC shall have the first option to perfect the rights in jointly made or generated 
Project Intellectual Property unless otherwise agreed in writing.

		(1) The rights to any revenues and profits, resulting from any product, process, or other innovation 
or invention based on the cooperative shall be allocated between the SBC and the RI as follows:

	SBC Percent: ________		RI Percent: ________
 
		(2) Expenses and other liabilities associated with the development and marketing of any product, 
process, or other innovation or invention shall be allocated as follows:  the SBC will be responsible for ______ 
percent and the RI will be responsible for ______ percent.

	(c) The Parties agree to disclose to each other, in writing, each and every Subject Invention, which may be 
patentable or otherwise protectable under the United States patent laws in Title 35, United States Code.  The Parties 
acknowledge that they will disclose Subject Inventions to each other and the Agency within two months after their 
respective inventor(s) first disclose the invention in writing to the person(s) responsible for patent matters of the 
disclosing Party.  All written disclosures of such inventions shall contain sufficient detail of the invention, 
identification of any statutory bars, and shall be marked confidential, in accordance with 35 U.S.C. § 205.
 
	(d) Each party hereto may use Project Intellectual Property of the other nonexclusively and without 
compensation in connection with research or development activities for this STTR project, including inclusion in 
STTR project reports to the AGENCY and proposals to the AGENCY for continued funding of this STTR project 
through additional phases.

	(e) In addition to the Government's rights under the Patent Rights clause of 37 CFR § 401.14, the Parties 
agree that the Government shall have an irrevocable, royalty free, nonexclusive license for any governmental 
purpose in any Project Intellectual Property.
	(f) SBC will have an option to commercialize the Project Intellectual Property of RI, subject to any rights 
of the Government therein, as follows?
		(1) Where Project Intellectual Property of RI is a potentially patentable invention, SBC will have 
an exclusive option for a license to such invention, for an initial option period of _______ months after such 
invention has been reported to SBC.  SBC may, at its election and subject to the patent expense reimbursement 
provisions of this section, extend such option for an additional _______ months by giving written notice of such 
election to RI prior to the expiration of the initial option period.  During the period of such option following notice 
by SBC of election to extend, RI will pursue and maintain any patent protection for the invention requested in 
writing by SBC and, except with the written consent of SBC or upon the failure of SBC to reimburse patenting 
expenses as required under this section, will not voluntarily discontinue the pursuit and maintenance of any United 
States patent protection for the invention initiated by RI or of any patent protection requested by SBC.  For any 
invention for which SBC gives notice of its election to extend the option, SBC will, within ______ days after 
invoice, reimburse RI for the expenses incurred by RI prior to expiration or termination of the option period in 
pursuing and maintaining (i) any United States patent protection initiated by RI and (ii) any patent protection 
requested by SBC. SBC may terminate such option at will by giving written notice to RI, in which case further 
accrual of reimbursable patenting expenses hereunder, other than prior commitments not practically revocable, will 
cease upon RI's receipt of such notice.  At any time prior to the expiration or termination of an option, SBC may 
exercise such option by giving written notice to RI, whereupon the parties will promptly and in good faith enter into 
negotiations for a license under RI's patent rights in the invention for SBC to make, use and/or sell products and/or 
services that embody, or the development, manufacture and/or use of which involves employment of, the invention.  
The terms of such license will include:  (i) payment of reasonable royalties to RI on sales of products or services 
which embody, or the development, manufacture or use of which involves employment of, the invention; (ii) 
reimbursement by SBC of expenses incurred by RI in seeking and maintaining patent protection for the invention in 
countries covered by the license (which reimbursement, as well as any such patent expenses incurred directly by 
SBC with RI's authorization, insofar as deriving from RI's interest in such invention, may be offset in full against up 
to _______ of accrued royalties in excess of any minimum royalties due RI); and, in the case of an exclusive license, 
(iii) reasonable commercialization milestones and/or minimum royalties.

		(2) Where Project Intellectual Property of RI is other than a potentially patentable invention, SBC 
will have an exclusive option for a license, for an option period extending until ______ months following 
completion of RI's performance of that phase of this STTR project in which such Project Intellectual Property of RI 
was developed by RI.  SBC may exercise such option by giving written notice to RI, whereupon the parties will 
promptly and in good faith enter into negotiations for a license under RI's interest in the subject matter for SBC to 
make, use and/or sell products or services which embody, or the development, manufacture and/or use of which 
involve employment of, such Project Intellectual Property of RI. The terms of such license will include:  (i) payment 
of reasonable royalties to RI on sales of products or services that embody, or the development, manufacture or use of 
which involves employment of, the Project Intellectual Property of RI and, in the case of an exclusive license, (ii) 
reasonable commercialization milestones and/or minimum royalties.

		(3) Where more than one royalty might otherwise be due in respect of any unit of product or 
service under a license pursuant to this Agreement, the parties shall in good faith negotiate to ameliorate any effect 
thereof that would threaten the commercial viability of the affected products or services by providing in such 
license(s) for a reasonable discount or cap on total royalties due in respect of any such unit.

4.  Follow-on Research or Development.

All follow-on work, including any licenses, contracts, subcontracts, sub- licenses or arrangements of any type, shall 
contain appropriate provisions to implement the Project Intellectual Property rights provisions of this agreement and 
insure that the Parties and the Government obtain and retain such rights granted herein in all future resulting 
research, development, or commercialization work.

5.  Confidentiality/Publication.

	(a) Background Intellectual Property and Project Intellectual Property of a party, as well as other 
proprietary or confidential information of a party, disclosed by that party to the other in connection with this STTR 
project shall be received and held in confidence by the receiving party and, except with the consent of the disclosing 
party or as permitted under this Agreement, neither used by the receiving party nor disclosed by the receiving party 
to others, provided that the receiving party has notice that such information is regarded by the disclosing party as 
proprietary or confidential.  However, these confidentiality obligations shall not apply to use or disclosure by the 
receiving party after such information is or becomes known to the public without breach of this provision or is or 
becomes known to the receiving party from a source reasonably believed to be independent of the disclosing party 
or is developed by or for the receiving party independently of its disclosure by the disclosing party.
 
	(b) Subject to the terms of paragraph (a) above, either party may publish its results from this STTR project.  
However, the publishing party will give a right of refusal to the other party with respect to a proposed publication, as 
well as a _____ day period in which to review proposed publications and submit comments, which will be given full 
consideration before publication.  Furthermore, upon request of the reviewing party, publication will be deferred for 
up to ______ additional days for preparation and filing of a patent application which the reviewing party has the 
right to file or to have filed at its request by the publishing party.

6.  Liability.

	(a) Each party disclaims all warranties running to the other or through the other to third parties, whether 
express or implied, including without limitation warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, and 
freedom from infringement, as to any information, result, design, prototype, product or process deriving directly or 
indirectly and in whole or part from such party in connection with this STTR project.

	(b) SBC will indemnify and hold harmless RI with regard to any claims arising in connection with 
commercialization of the results of this STTR project by or under the authority of SBC. The PARTIES will 
indemnify and hold harmless the Government with regard to any claims arising in connection with 
commercialization of the results of this STTR project.

7.  Termination.

	(a) This agreement may be terminated by either Party upon days written notice to the other Party.  This 
agreement may also be terminated by either Party in the event of the failure of the other Party to comply with the 
terms of this agreement.

	(b) In the event of termination by either Party, each Party shall be responsible for its share of the costs 
incurred through the effective date of termination, as well as its share of the costs incurred after the effective date of 
termination, and which are related to the termination.  The confidentiality, use, and/or non-disclosure obligations of 
this agreement shall survive any termination of this agreement.

AGREED TO AND ACCEPTED--

Small Business Concern

By:____________________________________	Date:______________
Print Name:__________________________________________________
Title:_______________________________________________________

Research Institution

By:____________________________________	Date:______________
Print Name:__________________________________________________
Title:______________________________________________________

 
STTR CHECK LIST


For assistance in completing your proposal, use the following checklist to ensure your submission is complete.

1.	The entire proposal including any supplemental material shall not exceed a total of 25 8.5 x 11 inch pages, 
including Cooperative Agreement.  (Sections 3.2.2, 3.2.6).

2.	The proposal and innovation is submitted for one topic only.  (Sections 1.4.1, 5.1.1).

3.	The entire proposal is submitted consistent with the requirements and in the order outlined in Section 3.2

4.	The technical proposal contains all eleven parts in order.  (Section 3.2.4).  

5.	Certifications in Form 9A are completed.

6.	Proposed funding does not exceed $100,000.  (Sections 1.4.1, 5.1.1).

7.	Proposed project duration should not exceed 12 months.  (Sections 1.4.1, 5.1.1).

8.	Cooperative Agreement is signed and included.  (Sections 3.2.2, 3.2.6).

9.	Printed version of Forms 9A, 9B and 9C included in the postal submission.  

10.	Postal submission includes an original signed proposal with all forms (Section 6.3).

11.	Entire proposal including Forms 9A, 9B and 9C submitted via the Internet.

12.	Internet submission must be consistent with Postal submission.  

13.	Proposals must be received by the NASA SBIR/STTR Program Support Office no later than by 5:00 p.m. EDT 
on Wednesday, June 6, 2001.  (Section 6.3.3).  

 


Appendix A:  Phase I Sample Table of Contents 

A sample table of contents to fulfill the part order requirements for the Technical Proposal (Section 3.2.4) is pro-
vided below:

Table of Contents


Part 1: 	Table of Contents………………………………………………………………………….	Page 3
Part 2: 	Identification and Significance of the Innovation…………………………………………	 TBD
Part 3: 	Technical Objectives………………………………………………………………………	 TBD
Part 4: 	Work Plan …………………………………………………………………………………	 TBD
Part 5: 	Related R/R&D……………………………………………………………………………	 TBD
Part 6: 	Key Personnel and Bibliography of Directly Related Work………………………………	 TBD
Part 7: 	Relationship with Phase II or Future R/R&D…………………………………………….	 TBD
Part 8: 	Company Information and Facilities………………………………………………………	 TBD
Part 9: 	Subcontracts and Consultants……………………………………………………………..	 TBD
Part 10: 	Commercial Applications Potential ………………………………………………………	 TBD
Part 11: 	Similar Proposals and Awards ……………………………………………………………	 TBD






Appendix B:  Sample Format for Briefing Chart



SBIR/STTR 2001-1 Solicitation

ii



2001 SBIR/STTR Table of Contents
2001 SBIR/STTR Table of Contents
i

2001 SBIR/STTR Program Description
157

2001 SBIR/STTR Program Description
2001 SBIR/STTR Definitions
2001 SBIR/STTR Definitions
2001 SBIR/STTR Proposal Preparation Instructions and Requirements 
2001 SBIR/STTR Proposal Preparation Instructions and Requirements
2001 SBIR/STTR Method of Selection and Evaluation Criteria 
2001 SBIR/STTR Method of Selection and Evaluation Criteria
2001 SBIR/STTR Considerations 
2001 SBIR/STTR Considerations
2001 SBIR/STTR Submission of Proposals
2001 SBIR/STTR Submission of Proposals
2001 SBIR/STTR Scientific and Technical Information Sources
2001 SBIR/STTR Scientific and Technical Information Sources
2001 SBIR/STTR Research Topics
2001 SBIR/STTR Research Topics 
2001 SBIR Research Topics – Aerospace Technology
2001 SBIR Research Topics – Aerospace Technology
2001 SBIR Research Topics – Biological and Physical Research
2001 SBIR Research Topics – Biological and Physical Research
2001 SBIR Research Topics – Biological and Physical Research
2001 SBIR Research Topics – Earth Science
2001 SBIR Research Topics – Earth Science
Research Topics – Earth Science
Research Topics – Earth Science
2001 SBIR Research Topics – Human Exploration and Development of Space
2001 SBIR Research Topics – Human Exploration and Development of Space
2001 SBIR Research Topics –Human Exploration and Development of Space
2001 SBIR Research Topics – Space Science
2001 SBIR Research Topics –Space Science
STTR Research Topics
2001 STTR Research Topics 
2001 STTR Research Topics
2001 STTR Research Topics 
2001 STTR Research Topics 
2001 SBIR/STTR Forms and Certifications 
2001 SBIR Forms and Certifications 
2001 SBIR Forms and Certifications 
2001 STTR Forms and Certifications 
2001 STTR Forms and Certifications 
2001 SBIR/STTR Appendices 
