Braille Books 1995-1996

National Library Service for the 
Blind and Physically Handicapped
Library of Congress
Washington 1997

Fiction

Adventure

The Call of the Wild  BR 9833
by Jack London 
1 volume
Buck, a St. Bernard, is stolen and trained to be a sled dog
in the Alaska gold fields. Abused by both men and dogs, Buck
learns to fight ruthlessly until he finds in John Thornton a
master he loves and respects. For junior and senior high and
older readers. 1903.

The Celestine Prophecy: An Adventure  BR 9732
by James Redfield 
2 volumes
The author embarks on a search for an ancient Peruvian
manuscript that predicts a massive transformation in human
society. He meets with resistance from government and church
authorities in Peru, who attempt to suppress knowledge of
the manuscript. He persists, however, discovering nine
spiritual insights in separate encounters, beginning with
the most common--an awareness of coincidences in life. Some
strong language. Bestseller 1993.

The Commodore  BR 10224
by Patrick O'Brian 
3 volumes
As in sixteen previous tales in this series, Jack Aubrey and
Stephen Maturin occupy center stage. Upon their return to
England, the seafaring duo face several domestic
adjustments. Just as life on land becomes very interesting,
Captain Aubrey is ordered to Africa. But the Napoleonic Wars
are not over, so another, secret order redirects the
commodore to Ireland to intercept the French. Some strong
language. 1994.

The Lost World  BR 10243
by Michael Crichton 
3 volumes
This sequel to Jurassic Park (BR 9345) is set six years
after the dinosaur island park disaster in which humans
fought off genetically engineered replicas of prehistoric
animals. One survivor of that attack is now a member of a
group who return to the area and meet up with the remaining
dinosaurs. Strong language and violence. Bestseller 1995.

The Reverse of the Medal  BR 9868
by Patrick O'Brian 
2 volumes
Having successfully completed his mission in the Atlantic,
Captain Jack Aubrey is now back in London. While there he
makes some investments that suddenly put his career in
jeopardy. Once again his ship's surgeon, Stephen Maturin,
comes to his rescue. 1986.

She  BR 9971
by H. Rider Haggard 
3 volumes
An Englishman journeys to Africa to track down the evil
queen who, according to an ancient manuscript, murdered one
of his ancestors. In the jungle he meets with the beautiful,
ageless white goddess, "She," who falls in love with him and
shares the secret of the Pillar of Life. Some violence.
1887.

Treason's Harbour  BR 9869
by Patrick O'Brian 
3 volumes
Following a battle off the Ionian islands, Captain Jack
Aubrey and Dr. Stephen Maturin are in Malta, where both of
Aubrey's ships, the Worcester and the Surprise, are
undergoing repairs. While Aubrey concerns himself with the
reconditioning work, Maturin, surgeon and spy, learns that
agents of Napoleon are planning to sabotage Aubrey's next
mission. 1983.

White Fang  BR 9693
by Jack London 
1 volume
A wolf-dog, rescued from danger and tamed by a kind master,
redeems his brute nature by defending his master's family against an escaped convict.  For junior
and senior high and older readers. 1905.

Classics

Around the World in Eighty Days  BR 9468
by Jules Verne 
2 volumes
Phileas Fogg is certain that he can travel around the world
in eighty days--an incredibly short period of time in 1873.
He's so sure that it can be done that he's wagered half of
his fortune and set off on the grand adventure with his
servant Passepartout. For high school and older readers.
1874.

The Call of the Wild  BR 9833
by Jack London 
1 volume
Buck, a St. Bernard, is stolen and trained to be a sled dog
in the Alaska gold fields. Abused by both men and dogs, Buck
learns to fight ruthlessly until he finds in John Thornton a
master he loves and respects. For junior and senior high and
older readers. 1903.

Doctor Zhivago  BR 9814
by Boris Pasternak 
5 volumes
The story of a Russian physician and poet during the early
decades of the twentieth century. Yurii Zhivago, an
individualist and something of an outsider, is separated
from his wife by the Bolsheviks and falls in love with Lara,
the wife of another man. Pasternak's portrait of Russian
life during the post-revolution years includes an epilogue
expressing hope for liberation and freedom in the future.
1958.

The Grapes of Wrath  BR 9954
by John Steinbeck 
5 volumes
Pulitzer Prize-winning story of the Joads from Oklahoma,
who, along with other families during the Great Depression,
are driven from their dust-bowl farms by the encroachment of
large agricultural interests. They set out, like generations
before them, to the promised land of California to find
work. Instead they face organized opposition to their
struggle to survive. Strong language. 1939.

Hilda Lessways  BR 9851
by Arnold Bennett 
3 volumes
This companion to Clayhanger (BR 9121) begins in 1878 in
Turnhill, England, where twenty-one-year-old Hilda Lessways
finds life with her widowed mother unfulfilling. Afraid that
her inheritance will be squandered by her mother, Hilda
gathers her courage and seeks the advice of attorney George
Cannon. Cannon offers Hilda a vocation, and her life begins
to change. Then a second man enters her life: Edwin
Clayhanger. 1911.

The Life and Adventures of Martin Chuzzlewit  BR 10218
by Charles Dickens 
8 volumes
Old Chuzzlewit, surrounded by a selfish family, sees the
same traits forming in his grandson Martin and kicks him out
of the house. Penniless, young Martin makes his way to
America to seek his fortune. After a series of difficult
experiences, he is cured of his greed. Other members of the
Chuzzlewit clan have their own selfish goals, including a
plot to murder Old Chuzzlewit. 1844.

Lord of the Flies  BR 9480
by William Golding 
2 volumes
With horrifying implications, this novel relates the
experiences of a group of English boys who are wrecked on a
desert island and have to establish their own system of
government. For junior and senior high and older readers.
1954.

The Mysterious Island  BR 10097
by Jules Verne 
2 volumes
During the Civil War, Northerner and engineer Cyrus Smith is
a Southern captive. He escapes by hot-air balloon with three
other men, a boy, and a dog. A storm blows them to an
island, but Smith is lost at sea. Later the others find him,
but no one can explain how he reached land. Mysterious
events and resourcefulness help them survive the next four
years. Sequel to Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Sea (BR
9469). For high school and older readers. 1870.

The Prince and the Pauper  BR 9695
by Mark Twain 
2 volumes
The future Edward VI of England and a young pauper agree to
trade places for a few days. The pauper becomes king, and he
finds it quite insufferable. Meanwhile, the prince is
roaming the street in tatters. People and circumstances
almost make the role reversal permanent. For junior and
senior high and older readers. 1882.

The Scarlet Letter  BR 9407
by Nathaniel Hawthorne 
2 volumes
First published in 1850, this symbolic novel set in Puritan
New England traces the effects of one particular sin on the
lives of four people. Hester Prynne is forced to wear her
sin openly in the form of a scarlet letter "A" for adultery.
The other characters are Hester's child; her husband, who
seeks vengeance; and the minister, who conceals his guilt.
1850.

Sons and Lovers  BR 9812
by D.H. Lawrence 
5 volumes
Restored text. Story of Paul and William Morel, brothers who
bear witness to the tensions of their working-class parents.
William adopts the bitterness that his father expresses too
freely. Paul, the younger, finds one woman appealing and
another exciting, but can elicit for neither the sensitive
feelings he has for his mother. Some strong language and
some descriptions of sex. 1913.

These Twain  BR 9853
by Arnold Bennett 
4 volumes
In the third volume of the Clayhanger trilogy that includes
Clayhanger (BR 9121) and Hilda Lessways (BR 9851), Edwin and
Hilda have married after Hilda's "tragic adventure with a
rascal and a bigamist," and her son by George Cannon is now
ten years old. The book begins with an "at home" gathering
at the Clayhangers' in 1892 and follows the ups and downs of
their marriage through the next five years. 1915.

Tom Brown's Schooldays  BR 9429
by Thomas Hughes 
3 volumes
Tom Brown is from a long line of Browns who claim that the
British nation owes much of its greatness to them. As a
young boy, Tom, the son of a squire, is encouraged to play
with the village boys. But at the age of nine, Tom is packed
off to Rugby, where he fears but learns to respect the
famous Dr. Arnold; develops long-lasting friendships; and
gets involved in typical English schoolboy adventures,
including the inevitable fights. 1857.

Twenty-Thousand Leagues under the Sea  BR 9469
by Jules Verne 
3 volumes
A nineteenth-century science fiction tale of an electric
submarine, the Nautilus; its eccentric captain, Captain
Nemo; and the undersea world. The novel anticipates many of
the scientific achievements of the twentieth century. For
junior and senior high and older readers. 1869.

War and Peace  BR 9710
by Leo Tolstoy 
14 volumes
First published in 1869, this epic novel deals with Russia
and France at the time of Napoleon Bonaparte. It describes
the invasion of Russia by Napoleon and his army and presents
the author's theories of history. 1869.

The War of the Worlds  BR 9590
by H.G. Wells 
2 volumes
The Martians, a loathsome though highly organized race,
invade England and, with their superior weapons, subdue and
prey on the people. For high school and adult readers. 1898.


Family

Dancing on Glass  BR 9675
by Susan Taylor Chehak 
2 volumes
Adolescent Wolfgang Von Vechten, angry that his mother had
to marry his late father's business partner, kills the man
and hangs himself. Years later, his nephew Bader marries the
partner's great-granddaughter Katherine. But Bader becomes
involved with a neighbor's teenaged son, and when Katherine
crashes to her death while dancing on a skylight, history
repeats itself. Strong language, violence, and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1993.

Family Games  BR 9964
by Jean Stubbs 
3 volumes
Blanche Malpas's mother, Sybil, invites her grown children
to spend Christmas with her and their father, Tony, at their
Cornwall home. Tony has ignored Blanche since the birth of
her illegitimate son, Aaron. The reunion is interrupted by
unexpected guests: Aaron's father; Tony's mysterious sister,
Tasha; and the estranged wife of Blanche's brother. And
Blanche learns the shocking truth about her parentage.
Strong language. 1994.

The Hundred Secret Senses  BR 10230
by Amy Tan 
3 volumes
Although Olivia is disappointed and often embarrassed by her
Chinese-born half sister, she tolerates Kwan's eccentric,
brassy, meddlesome ways and even her incessant discussions
with nineteenth-century Chinese ghosts. Olivia is also
disappointed with her marriage and its own ghost. Eventually
Kwan helps Olivia to understand loyalty and unconditional
love. Some violence, some descriptions of sex, and some
strong language. Bestseller 1995.

The Mother: The Good Earth Trilogy, Volume 3  BR 9579
by Pearl S. Buck 
2 volumes
Sequel to Sons (BR 9578). A Chinese peasant, overwhelmed by
the responsibility of an aged mother, a wife, and small
children and by the routine of his daily life, is stimulated
by travelers' tales and gambler's luck and suddenly deserts
his family. The young mother slaves to support everyone with
a devotion that achieves its reward at last in a grandchild.
1934.

The Seventh Stone  BR 9442
by Nancy Freedman 
4 volumes
World War II is drawing to a close, and Noboru Sanogawa,
unhappy in his marriage to Momoko, chooses death with honor
as a kamikaze pilot. Besides his wife, he leaves behind a
young son, Akio. As Momoko tries to remake her life within
traditional Japanese society, she watches Akio seek to
avenge his father's death by building a worldwide financial
network. Some violence, some strong language, and some
descriptions of sex. 1992.

Song of Solomon  BR 9632
by Toni Morrison 
3 volumes (Reissue)
This novel surveys nearly a century of American history as
it impinges upon four generations of a single black family.
Macon Dead III, known as Milkman, is the first black baby
allowed to be born in Mercy Hospital in the 1930s. Milkman
undertakes an epic journey into an understanding of his
family's heritage and, hence, himself. Strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1977.

Fantasy

Aegypt  BR 9605
by John Crowley 
4 volumes
Pierce Moffett, an out-of-work professor, and Rosie
Rasmussen, a young divorcee, are drawn together by their
love for the historical novels of the reclusive and
eccentric Fellowes Kraft. They soon find themselves on the
trail of an alternate history of the world, full of angels,
magic, and the hidden lore of a country known as Aegypt.
1987.

Both Sides of Time  BR 10273
by Caroline B. Cooney 
2 volumes
Annie wants romance from her boyfriend, Sean, but he's only
interested in cars. While visiting his apartment at the
crumbling Stratton mansion, Annie wanders through the
building, sad that it is to be demolished. Suddenly, she is
pulled back a century to 1895 and meets Strat, young heir to
the mansion. The period is romantic but not kind to women or
immigrant groups, and a murder threatens Annie and her new
friends. For junior and senior high readers. 1995.

The Catswold Portal  BR 9804
by Shirley Rousseau Murphy 
3 volumes
A fantasy set in 1957 Earth and in the Netherworld or world
of faerie. Queen Siddonie, pretender to the throne of
faerie, plans to conquer the Netherworld--an act that would
profoundly affect the upper world. The true queen,
seventeen-year-old Melissa, has been transformed into a
calico cat and has taken up residence with artist Braden
West, who lives near the portal between the two worlds. For
high school and older readers. 1992.

Dinotopia: A Land Apart from Time  BR 9906
by James Gurney 
1 volume
In 1860 biologist Arthur Denison and his son Will sail from
Boston on a voyage of discovery. Two years later they are
shipwrecked and carried by dolphins to the lost island of
Dinotopia. There dinosaurs and people live harmoniously
together, sharing the dinosaurs' centuries of knowledge and
the newer learning brought by the humans.  For junior and
senior high and older readers. Bestseller 1992.

The Dragon at War  BR 9385
by Gordon R. Dickson 
3 volumes
Dragon Knight Sir James Eckert loses the help of his
powerful ally, the magician Carolinus, just as the French,
allied with a host of nasty sea serpents, begin the invasion
of England. Alone with his lesser powers of magic and the
ability to transform himself into a dragon, Eckert faces the
evil mastermind behind the raid. Sequel to Dragon on the
Border (BR 9384). 1992.

The Dragon on the Border  BR 9384
by Gordon R. Dickson 
3 volumes
Twentieth-century American Jim Eckert, now Baron de
Malencontri et Riveroak, continues his sojourn in medieval
England. As he and Sir Brian travel toward the Scottish
border, they are met by several men who appear to be riding
on invisible steeds. They soon discover that England is
being invaded by Hollow Men, and, unfortunately, these men
when killed can be restored to life as long as one Hollow
Man lives. Sequel to Dragon Knight (BR 9094). 1992.

The Fellowship of the Ring: Being the First Part of The Lord
of the Rings  BR 9745
by J.R.R. Tolkien 
5 volumes
In this first volume of The Lord of the Rings, Frodo, a
home-loving hobbit, inherits the magic ring that his Uncle
Bilbo brought back from his adventures in The Hobbit. To
protect the ring from the powers of darkness, Frodo must
make a long, dangerous journey. 1954.

Into the Green  BR 9588
by Charles De Lint 
2 volumes
Traveling with her father's band of tinkers,
fifteen-year-old Angharad learns that she has "the sight"
when she meets a witch and his grandson Garrow. Shortly
after she and Garrow marry, a plague kills him and everyone
Angharad knows. Accepting the life of a witch, Angharad
obtains the gift of harping and meets a tree wizard. Soon,
the wizard has a dangerous mission into the green that only
Angharad can accomplish. Strong language and violence. 1993.

The Little Country  BR 9380
by Charles De Lint 
5 volumes
Musician Janey Little discovers an unknown fantasy novel,
entitled The Little Country, in her grandfather's Cornwall
home. She finds that the book contains a magic that somehow
connects her real-world life with the action of the story
itself. A chain of events is unleashed in both the actual
world and the book that brings the forces of good and evil
into sharp conflict. 1991.

Love and Sleep  BR 10083
by John Crowley 
1 volume
Pierce Moffett delves deeper into Renaissance metaphysics in
an attempt to come to grips with the modern world where he
has always felt out of place. Memories of his childhood,
coupled with his studies of Renaissance mystics, now seem to
reach out of the past, intertwining with his present, and he
perceives that he is on the threshold of a magical change in
his life, and perhaps in the universe itself. Sequel to
Aegypt (BR 9605). 1994.

Orlando: A Biography  BR 9501
by Virginia Woolf 
2 volumes
Fantasy about a young Elizabethan nobleman who, by book's
end, has been transformed into a young woman. The author
examines English literary and social history through the
three hundred years of Orlando's life, and the
transformation emphasizes Woolf's belief that women are the
intellectual equals of men. 1928.

The Return of the King: Being the Third Part of The Lord of
the Rings  BR 9749
by J.R.R. Tolkien 
5 volumes
In this third volume of the Ring trilogy, Frodo and Sam bear
the ring to Mount Doom. The War of the Rings, fought between
the forces for good and the Dark Lord of evil, is ended.
Sequel to The Two Towers (BR 9747). 1955.

Strange Devices of the Sun and Moon  BR 9553
by Lisa Goldstein 
3 volumes
London, 1590. A band of faeries invades the city as
conspirators plot to unseat Queen Elizabeth I. The sprites
are looking for their long-awaited king, Arthur--son of
Alice Wood, a widowed bookseller. But also searching are
alchemist Paul Hogg and famed London author Christopher
Marlowe. As their paths cross with the faeries, a battle
between good and evil ensues. For high school and older
readers. 1993.

The Two Towers: Being the Second Part of The Lord of the
Rings  BR 9747
by J.R.R. Tolkien 
4 volumes
In this second volume of The Lord of the Rings, the
now-separated companions of the Ring meet Saruman the
wizard, cross the Dead Marshes, and prepare for the Great
War in which the power of the Ring will be undone. Sequel to
The Fellowship of the Ring (BR 9745). 1954.

When Bobby Kennedy Was a Moving Man  BR 9528
by Robert Ellis Gordon 
1 volume
Seattle moving man Stanley Higgins is surprised to find
himself working with Bobby Kennedy, who has been sent back
to Earth with a few powers. But Bobby soon angers the gods
by abusing these gifts, gets fired, and attempts to murder
the mobster he holds responsible for Jack Kennedy's death.
In prison, Bobby hallucinates about his first life. Strong
language, explicit descriptions of sex, and some violence.
1994.

Wilderness  BR 9478
by Dennis Danvers 
2 volumes
Alice White's secret has prevented her from getting close to
people, because either they would think she is insane or
they would believe her and be horrified. When Alice falls in
love with biology professor Erik Summers, she decides to
risk everything and tell him the truth: ever since puberty,
Alice has changed into a wolf during each full moon. Strong
language, explicit descriptions of sex, and some violence.
1991.

General

Alma  BR 10350
by Gordon Burn 
2 volumes
Burn bases this 1991 Whitbread Prize novel on the life of
Alma Cogan, a 1950s British singer who died of cancer in
1966. In Burn's tale, Alma is still alive in 1986, and she
explores the complex relationship between her public and
private life. Some strong language and some violence. 1991.

The Book of Dreams  BR 9838
by Craig Nova 
3 volumes
Marta works at the Hollywood Romance Advertiser. When an
errand for her boss ends in murder, Marta's ex-con neighbor,
Victor, who has been secretly following her, insists Marta
help him in a blackmail scheme. Cleaning offices, Victor has
stumbled upon tapes of a movie star's therapy sessions.
Meanwhile, Victor loses the boy he is assigned to as a Big
Brother, and a wealthy man falls for Marta. Strong language
and some violence. 1994.

California Angel  BR 10106
by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg 
2 volumes
Toy Johnson's husband is annoyed when she gives money to her
needy students. What is this compulsion to help children
that drives Toy time after time? And how are her efforts to
help children related to her dreams and to her recurring
cardiac episodes? While on a trip to New York with a friend,
she has an attack and finds herself saving a child from a
burning building. Then she is arrested for kidnapping.
Bestseller 1995.

The Diary of Emily Dickinson  BR 9760
by Jamie Fuller 
1 volume
This fictional diary of the thirty-seventh year of
nineteenth-century poet Emily Dickinson contains 102
entries, twenty-five "new" poems, and biographical and other
editorial comments. The premise is that a workman found this
diary hidden in a wall after Dickinson's death. Enthralled,
he kept it secret until shortly before he died. This "window
into her thoughts" reflects the themes found in Dickinson's
poems and letters. 1993.

Emily Louise  BR 9861
by Joan Darlington Beam 
2 volumes
Twenty-nine-year-old Theresa Freidmann has been confined to
her bed in a nursing home for five years because of
arthritis. She is annoyed when "shameless" Emily Louise
begins working at the home and disrupts Theresa's
predictable life. Emily Louise dyes Theresa's hair, scolds
her for not doing things for herself, and warns her that her
lawyer may be after her money. Theresa's anger fades as she
begins to enjoy life again. Some strong language. 1994.

Fat Lightning  BR 9963
by Howard Owen 
2 volumes
When Nancy's husband, Sam, gets fed up with his pharmacist
job in Richmond, he takes Nancy and their toddler son back
to his hometown, where his surly uncle Lot has a
long-burning mountain of sawdust on his land. As Nancy and
Sam face extramarital temptations, Lot's solitary life
changes when he discovers an image of Jesus on his barn.
Years later, Nancy writes a novel about what happened to
Lot. Strong language, descriptions of sex, and some
violence. 1994.

The Gates of Ivory  BR 9423
by Margaret Drabble 
4 volumes
In A Natural Curiosity (BR 8228), Drabble portrayed the
lives of British women Liz, Alix, and Esther, friends since
college. In this sequel, Liz, a London psychiatrist,
receives an odd package from her longtime friend Stephen
Cox, who has gone to Cambodia. As Liz searches for Stephen
in Southeast Asia, glimpses of his life and the lives of Liz
and her two friends are revealed. Some strong language and
some descriptions of sex. 1991.

Ghosts  BR 9511
by John Banville 
2 volumes
Novel by Irish author of The Book of Evidence (BR 8400)
blends real people, ghosts, and painted figures. When seven
day-trip passengers come ashore after their pleasure boat is
wrecked, they descend upon the island household of Professor
Kreutznaer, who is engaged in writing art history. It seems
that the occupants of the boat and the house have reason to
study one another. 1993.

The Holy Man  BR 10232
by Susan Trott 
1 volume
Joe is a holy man who lives on a mountaintop with several
other monks. During the summer, there is a steady line of
people from all walks of life coming up the mountain path to
see Joe and to hear his words of wisdom. Each pilgrim comes
to Joe with a problem addressing themes such as violence,
love, fear, ego, or impatience. 1995.

The Journey of Ibn Fattouma  BR 9503
by Naguib Mahfouz 
1 volume
This novel by the Nobel Prize-winning author was first
published in Arabic in 1983. It is a parable about Fattouma,
a young man in search of answers to life's fundamental
questions, who is bound for Gebel--land of no return. His
journey is interrupted by marriage, children, wartime,
imprisonment, political demonstrations, and thwarted
attempts to follow his religion. Fattouma's journey toward
perfection lasts a lifetime. 1983.

The Lost Boy: A Novella  BR 9575
by Thomas Wolfe 
1 volume
Episodes based on the author's childhood recall his older
brother Grover from the perspective of different family
members. Grover himself relates an experience in the town
square. Then his mother recalls an incident with Grover on a
train trip to the World's Fair in St. Louis. A sister
examines old photographs and relives the day Grover
contracted typhoid fever. Finally, the author returns to the
house where Grover died. 1937.

The Mandarins  BR 9769
by Simone de Beauvoir 
7 volumes
Set in Paris after World War II, this novel won the Prix
Goncourt, the most coveted literary prize in France. The
author draws upon her intellectual circle, which includes
Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus, for a portrait of the
philosophical and political climate of the period. 1954.

Midaq Alley  BR 9609
by Naguib Mahfouz 
2 volumes
Set in an ancient quarter of Cairo in the early 1940s, a
time when the British Army moved into the area in an effort
to thwart a Nazi invasion. Influenced by Western ideas, the
impoverished people who live and work in this crowded alley
are forever looking to escape life as they know it. Among
them are the caf‚ owner, Kirsha, who likes drugs and little
boys; Hamida, a beautiful and ambitious prostitute; and
Abbas, a naive barber. Some strong language. 1966.

Operation Wandering Soul  BR 9667
by Richard Powers 
4 volumes
Richard Kraft, surgical resident at Carver General in Los
Angeles, and Linda Espera, therapist, are weary of trying to
patch up the children in their care, including Joy, a boat
child from Asia; Nico, a child in a man's body; and Chuck,
nicknamed No-Face. As they work on the children's physical
needs, they also try to instill hope by telling them stories
about the Pied Piper, Peter Pan, and the Secret Garden. Some
strong language and some violence. 1993.

Papa's Suitcase  BR 10271
by Gerhard Kopf 
1 volume
The narrator, who dubs himself Hemingstein, is a lover of
books, especially those by Ernest Hemingway. He is so
obsessed with the writer that he embarks on a trip to the
places Hemingway visited around the world. Hemingstein hopes
to find the suitcase containing all of Hemingway's
manuscripts that was lost in Paris in 1922. But is he really
traveling around the world or only imagining it? 1994.

A Place Where the Sea Remembers  BR 9524
by Sandra Ben¡tez 
1 volume
In Santiago, Mexico, Candelario is pleased with his
promotion to salad-maker. When he learns his wife's young
sister Marta was raped and is planning to abort the fetus,
he grandly offers to raise the baby. But the unthinkable
happens: Candelario is fired for making lousy Caesar salads
and his once-barren wife becomes pregnant. When they refuse
her baby, Marta is desperate. Meanwhile, other Santiago
residents experience minidramas of their own. 1993.

The Raiders  BR 10130
by Harold Robbins 
3 volumes
Twenty years after The Carpetbaggers (BR 10129), wealthy
Jonas Cord is still regretting never telling his late father
he loved him and never having a son to express his love to.
Now, while Cord is on the run from federal marshals who want
him to take a business risk by testifying in front of
Congress, his wife is divorcing him. Then he learns he has a
grown son. Strong language, violence, and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1995.

The Rothman Scandal  BR 9817
by Stephen Birmingham 
5 volumes
Alexandra Rothman has come a long way since she left
Paradise, Missouri. She is editor-in-chief of Mode, a
fashion magazine that has just reached a record-breaking
circulation of five million. But at a celebration party,
Herbert Rothman, Alex's father-in-law and boss, makes an
announcement that shocks New York society and starts a chain
of events that may destroy the magazine. Violence, strong
language, and descriptions of sex. 1991.

The Secret Diary of Laura Palmer  BR 9421
by Jennifer Lynch 
2 volumes
Laura, late of the TV series Twin Peaks, received her diary
on July 22, 1984, a perfect day to turn twelve. As she
matures, Laura appears to be a happy and popular young girl.
But she also has a dark side. She is haunted in her dreams
by someone named BOB, and she is involved with drugs. As she
struggles through her teenage years, she becomes more and
more ashamed of the person she has become. Strong language
and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1990.

Shadow Play  BR 9711
by Charles Baxter 
3 volumes
Wyatt Palmer, artistic and clever as a boy, is now an
assistant city manager in a small town. When an old school
chum turns up with an offer to bring in business and jobs in
the form of a chemical plant, a deal is cut. Citizens of the
local community seem pleased with what WaldChem has done for
them. But Palmer knows the awful truth about what the
company is doing to their environment, and now he must make
a dreadful decision. Some strong language. 1993.

The Sixteen Pleasures  BR 9793
by Robert Hellenga 
3 volumes
When Florence is flooded in 1966, twenty-nine-year-old
American book conservator Margot Harrington offers her
services to the country where she spent two years of her
youth. She is helping restore a convent's collection when a
nun discovers an ancient book of erotic drawings and
sonnets. While attempting to sell the book to profit the
convent, Margot, inspired by the book, begins an affair with
an older married man. Explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

The Temptations of St. Ed and Brother S  BR 9601
by Frank Bergon 
3 volumes
In the 1990s many people are concerned about the
environment, as are St. Ed and Brother S, the only monks at
the Hermitage of Solitude in the Desert. Now there is a
nuclear waste dump planned for nearby land, and both monks,
as well as the Shoshone Indians, object. The monks also face
temptations, including lust and the desire for fame. Strong
language and some descriptions of sex. 1993.

Time and Time Again  BR 9990
by Dennis Danvers 
3 volumes
Novelist Marion Mead finds a 1769 newspaper ad by a man
whose wife, Susanna, ran away with a convict. Requesting
history on the family, Marion discovers Raymond Lord, who
owns the journal of Susanna's descendant, Pearl. As Marion's
novel about Susanna almost writes itself, she finds odd
coincidences between it and both Pearl's writing and her own
growing relationship with Raymond. Strong language, some
violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

To Dance with the White Dog  BR 9839
by Terry Kay 
2 volumes
Sam Peek's entry in his journal says simply, "Today my wife
died. We were married fifty-seven good years." His children
gather and begin to discuss what is to be done. Eventually
Sam finds himself alone, except for a mysterious white dog
only he can see--to the consternation of his children.
Although somewhat incapacitated by a bad leg, Sam remains
independent until he joins his wife in death. The dog then
appears to his family. Some strong language. 1990.

The Training Ground  BR 9420
by Siegfried Lenz 
4 volumes
Bruno Messmer, rescued by Konrad Zeller, narrates the story
of the Zeller family's resettlement on the Baltic coast
after World War II. Mistrust reigns until financial success
earns the Zellers a measure of respect. But Bruno is worried
that Konrad may soon die and that his children care little
for the tree farm that they have raised on a former military
training ground. Bruno's observations may be construed as a
metaphor for modern Germany. 1985.

Gothic

Dr. Haggard's Disease  BR 9623
by Patrick McGrath 
2 volumes
Set in England at the outset of World War II. Edward
Haggard, a young doctor, learns that he is not immune to
love, but he is stunned by the consequences of his affair
with Fanny, the wife of an older physician. Dr. Haggard
removes himself from the scene, but the day that Fanny's son
turns up in uniform, he discovers that his passion is
rekindled in a bizarre manner. Some strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 1993.

Vanish with the Rose  BR 9489
by Barbara Michaels 
3 volumes
Diana, a lawyer, knows she is risking a lot when she
convinces Walt, the landscaper, to recommend her to the
Nicholsons as a landscape designer. But she has to find out
what has happened to her brother Brad, last seen when
working for the previous owner. With her identity soon
uncovered, Diana and several young people begin a search
that involves haunting music, spells of d‚j… vu, a brutal
ex-husband, and a corpse. Strong language. 1992.

Walking after Midnight  BR 10189
by Karen Robards 
3 volumes
At 2:00 a.m., Summer McAfee, owner of a janitorial service,
is on her knees scrubbing the floor of a funeral home.
Suddenly the naked and badly bruised body of a man comes to
life, and he takes her hostage. Over the next four days they
are on the run, dodging bad cops and a ghost, as the former
corpse, a cop working under cover, tries to save himself and
Summer. Strong language, some violence, and some explicit
descriptions of sex. 1995.

Waltz in the Shadows  BR 9796
by Catherine Rieger 
2 volumes
Vienna, 1888. Emily Hopkins, twenty-two, has come to Vienna
at the request of Dr. Franz Joseph Demel to help write a
biography of her father that will, she hopes, dispel the
lies about him. But when Emily arrives, she doesn't remember
Dr. Demel. Mysterious events are occurring in the dark
house, which has become a sanitarium, and someone is
attempting to scare her with strange notes. She turns to Dr.
Maximillian Schaller for help. 1993.

Growing Up

Adam and Eve and Pinch-Me  BR 9998
by Julie Johnston 
2 volumes
Sara Moone's adoptive parents died when she was three. Since
then, she has shuttled from one foster home to another,
refusing to make friends and dreaming of quitting school at
sixteen. But at fifteen she is placed with the Huddlestons,
where she reluctantly develops some relationships and comes
face to face with her birth mother. Sara writes about her
jumbled feelings in her computer journal. For junior and
senior high readers. 1994.

The Hookmen  BR 10151
by Timothy Hillmer 
3 volumes
After his mother and sister leave, nineteen-year-old Cruz
takes a job with the Kern River Search and Rescue to support
himself and his alcoholic father. Aging Crawdad teaches Cruz
how to be a hookman, fishing dead bodies out of the river.
Cruz makes friends with hookman Walker and begins a
relationship with troubled Rita. Despite Walker's advice,
Cruz agrees to go on a wild boat ride with Crawdad. Strong
language and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

Jasmine Nights  BR 10268
by S.P. Somtow 
3 volumes
In a crazy mix of Thai, American, British, and classic Greek
influences, twelve-year-old Justin explores the mysteries of
the adult world in his native Bangkok. He and his two
cohorts-in-adventure, one from black Georgia, the other from
white South Africa, combine knowledge and misconceptions
from their very different backgrounds. Glossary of Siamese
words. Strong language and explicit descriptions of sex.
1994.

Jesse  BR 10145
by Gary Soto 
1 volume
In the 1960s, Jesse, seventeen, and his brother, Abel, move
out of their drunken stepfather's house into a cottage of
their own. Jesse then joins Abel in the community college.
They live on their late father's Social Security benefits
and their own work in the fields. Jesse worries about Cesar
Chavez's cause and about Abel's involvement with a
non-Mexican girl, and he tries to fit religion and
girlfriends into his own life. For high school and older
readers. 1994.

Mysterious Skin  BR 10270
by Scott Heim 
2 volumes
Little Leaguer Brian Lackey, eight, can't remember the five
hours following one of his games, and as the years pass,
Brian imagines he was abducted by aliens. Another boy on the
baseball team, Neil McCormick, had consented to sexual
fondling by their coach. When Brian begins to recollect that
his experience was shared by Neil, he tracks down Neil, who
is now a prostitute. Strong language, violence, and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1995.

Tom Brown's Schooldays  BR 9429
by Thomas Hughes 
3 volumes
Tom Brown is from a long line of Browns who claim that the
British nation owes much of its greatness to them. As a
young boy, Tom, the son of a squire, is encouraged to play
with the village boys. But at the age of nine, Tom is packed
off to Rugby, where he fears but learns to respect the
famous Dr. Arnold; develops long-lasting friendships; and
gets involved in typical English schoolboy adventures,
including the inevitable fights. 1857.

A World for Julius  BR 9739
by Alfredo Bryce Echenique 
5 volumes
Julius is a young boy growing up among the social elite in
Lima, Peru, during the 1940s and 1950s. His father died when
he was two, and he rarely sees his mother. His time is spent
playing in the great carriage that once belonged to his
great-grandfather, the president of the republic. But as
Julius's world expands through school and trips abroad, he
starts to realize the changes the outside world is bringing
to his country. Strong language. 1970.

Yoruba Girl Dancing  BR 9494
by Simi Bedford 
2 volumes
Remi's upbringing is entrusted to her wealthy grandparents
because she is a girl. She loves the "miniature village" of
her grandfather's African mansion. But at her grandfather's
death, Remi's parents send the six-year-old to school in
London, where she is set adrift in a sea of white faces.
Remi conquers the hurtful cultural differences and adjusts
to her life there. Years later she again becomes a Yoruba
girl dancing. For high school and older readers. 1991.

Historical

Beauty from Ashes  BR 10167
by Eugenia Price 
5 volumes
St. Simons Island, Georgia, 1845. Anne Couper Fraser has had
to face the death of her parents, her beloved husband John,
and a daughter. Now she must face the loss of her much loved
plantation on St. Simons Island. With the rest of her
children, Anne moves to Marietta, Georgia, and begins to put
her life back together-- until war clouds begin to gather
over her and the South. Sequel to Where Shadows Go (BR
9375). 1995. Bestseller.

The Burning Time  BR 10229
by Carol Matas 
1 volume
Set in seventeenth-century France. Fifteen-year-old Rose and
her mother are stunned when Rose's father, Philippe Rives,
is killed in a riding accident. And soon after the accident,
Madame Rives, a midwife and a healer, is accused of being a
witch. Rose, too, is a suspect, but she manages to escape.
Soon a simple country life becomes a fight for survival. For
junior and senior high and older readers. 1994.

Crossing by Night  BR 9701
by David Aaron 
4 volumes
Fictionalized account of the exploits of World War II spy
Elizabeth Pack. Pack was an American debutante who married
the British diplomat who impregnated her. When he gave up
their baby to avoid embarrassment, Elizabeth was devastated.
Her attempt to be a demure diplomatic spouse was quickly put
aside when she was given the chance to save the ambassador
to Spain. Strong language, violence, and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1993.

The Dawning of Deliverance: The Russians, Volume 5  BR 10264
by Judith Pella 
3 volumes
In the early 1900s, Countess Mariana Remizov, twenty-three
and unmarried, wants to do something with her life. Her
father and grandmother are outraged when Mariana heads to
the Manchurian front to work as a nurse. There she again
meets Daniel Trent. As war rages, Mariana and her family
rely on God's power to bring them love and freedom. Sequel
to Heirs of the Motherland (BR 9863). 1995.

Doctor Zhivago  BR 9814
by Boris Pasternak 
5 volumes
The story of a Russian physician and poet during the early
decades of the twentieth century. Yurii Zhivago, an
individualist and something of an outsider, is separated
from his wife by the Bolsheviks and falls in love with Lara,
the wife of another man. Pasternak's portrait of Russian
life during the post-revolution years includes an epilogue
expressing hope for liberation and freedom in the future.
1958.

The Fifth of March: A Story of the Boston Massacre  BR 10211
by Ann Rinaldi 
2 volumes
Rachel Marsh is an indentured nursemaid for the children of
John and Abigail Adams. Her friend Jane urges her to
consider her future and side with the rebelling colonists,
but like the Adamses, Rachel can't condone their gang-like
activities. Although Rachel doesn't like the attitude of the
newly arrived British troops either, she soon makes friends
with a lonely British soldier. For junior and senior high
readers. 1993.

The Four Adventures of Richard Hannay: The Thirty-Nine
Steps, Greenmantle, Mr. Standfast, The Three Hostages  BR
9656
by John Buchan 
8 volumes
First published between 1915 and 1924. In The Thirty-Nine
Steps, an engineer attempts to foil a conspiracy.
Greenmantle pits a secret agent against Germans trying to
start an Eastern holy war. Mr. Standfast deals with British
Intelligence in World War I. An agent uses hypnotism to
search for missing persons in The Three Hostages. 1988.

Hard Road to Gettysburg  BR 9743
by Ted Jones 
3 volumes
Caroline Wade's happiness when her twin sister, Victoria,
visits from Alabama turns to horror when two men break in to
kill Caroline--on her husband's orders. Victoria's slave
rescues the twins but an injured and pregnant Victoria is
bedridden until the birth of her triplets. She leaves one
infant with Caroline in Illinois and returns south, not
realizing that the siblings will meet again--on opposite
sides of the Civil War. Strong language and violence. 1993.

The Hawk and the Jewel: The Kensington Chronicles, Volume 1 
BR 9603
by Lori Wick 
3 volumes
Even though she is English, Shani is the most favored child
in the household of Ahmad Khan. Thus she has trouble
understanding how her beloved Ahmad can send her back to
England. On the voyage, Captain Brandon Hawkesbury tells
Sunny (her given name) about her family and about life in
England. But Hawk cannot prepare her for the turmoil she
soon faces. Prequel to Wings of the Morning (BR 9604). 1993.

Heirs of the Motherland: The Russians, Volume 4  BR 9863
by Judith Pella 
3 volumes
Russia, 1890s. War is on the horizon as Count Dmitri Remizov
returns from eighteen years in exile to claim his daughter
Mariana, raised by his wife Katrina's relatives--Sergei and
Anna Fedorcenko. The Fedorcenkos and Count Dmitri and
Mariana will have to call upon their faith to sustain them
as they struggle to reunite their families during these
tumultuous times. Sequel to Travail and Triumph (BR 9336).
1993.

Homeland  BR 9462
by John Jakes 
10 volumes
Berlin street urchin Pauli Kroner dreams of being a painter
and coming to America. At fourteen he arrives, makes his way
to his uncle's home in Chicago, and changes his name to Paul
Crown. A Kodak camera gives him a chance to put his artistic
skills to work, and he becomes involved in Hollywood and the
motion picture industry. Along the way, he falls in love
with Julie Vanderhoff. Crown Family Chronicles. Some strong
language. Bestseller 1993.

If I Should Die before I Wake  BR 10142
by Han Nolan 
2 volumes
Since her father died in an accident she attributes to his
Jewish boss, Hilary has shaved her head and joined a local
youth gang called the Great Aryan Warriors. Now in a Jewish
hospital after a motorcycle accident, Hilary is annoyed by
the pity in an elderly woman's eyes. Then Hilary spirals
into another place and time--Nazi Germany--and realizes she
is a Jewish girl named Chana. Strong language and some
violence. For junior and senior high readers. 1994.

The Journal of Hildegard of Bingen  BR 9516
by Barbara Lachman 
2 volumes
Inspired by the writings of a twelfth-century mystic, the
author creates a journal depicting a year in the life of the
medieval German abbess. Lachman reveals Hildegard's concern
for the secular and the spiritual world and depicts her as a
busy woman who established and ran an autonomous convent,
composed liturgical music, wrote poetry, tended the sick,
oversaw the illumination of manuscripts, and held her own
against paternalistic clergy. 1993.

Kristin Lavransdatter: Volume 1, The Bridal Wreath  BR 10085
by Sigrid Undset 
3 volumes
In this first volume of a trilogy set in medieval Norway,
the winner of the 1928 Nobel Prize for literature tells of
Kristin's girlhood and her love for Erlend Nikulauss”n, a
young man of whom her father strongly disapproves. Prequel
to The Mistress of Husaby (BR 10086). 1923.

The Moon Below  BR 9820
by Barbara Bickmore 
5 volumes
Hallie Thomas has grown up in the coal-mining fields of
England, but she hates it there and wants a better life
somewhere else. Her chance comes when she receives a letter
from an old friend, Chad Morgan, asking her to come to
Australia to be his wife. But when she falls ill on board
ship and is cared for by Dr. Tristan Faulkner, she falls
passionately in love with him. Some violence and some
explicit descriptions of sex. 1990.

Pacific Destiny: The Holts; An American Dynasty, Volume 8 
BR 9770
by Dana Fuller Ross 
3 volumes
In 1898 the Holts are affected by the battle over Cuba's
freedom from Spain. Tim Holt leaves his new bride to report
the action for his San Francisco newspaper, and Henry Blake
escapes the anger of wife Cindy by going undercover for the
army in Manila. Meanwhile, Frank Blake, last heard from in
Yukon Justice (BR 9323), considers giving up his adventurous
lifestyle. Strong language and some violence. 1994.

Peter Nevsky and the True Story of the Russian Moon Landing 
BR 9737
by John Calvin Batchelor 
5 volumes
Russia, 1968. Peter Nevsky, son of a World War II flying ace
who was murdered by Stalin's men, arrives at Starry Town,
home of the cosmonaut corps. At twenty-two, Peter has come
to keep a childhood appointment with the moon. But his life
will be ruled by the Martian Troika (three men who flew with
his father and are the soul of the space program) and by two
powerful women--Katya and Daemonia. Strong language. 1993.

The Plymouth Cloak: The Second Tale of Roger the Chapman  BR
9706
by Kate Sedley 
2 volumes
Roger the Chapman is in Exeter to peddle his wares when he
is summoned by the king's brother, the duke of Gloucester.
The duke, familiar with Roger's previous daring deeds,
requests that he join the king's messenger, who is
delivering an important letter. Roger learns there are many
who want to cause harm to messenger Philip Underdown, and
not just because of the letter. Some strong language and
some violence. 1992.

Pomp and Circumstance  BR 9418
by Fred Mustard Stewart 
4 volumes
As ten-year-olds, Adam Thorne and Lizzie Desmond vow their
love for each other. In 1856, at eighteen, they consummate
that love. Shortly thereafter, Lizzie finds she is with
child, and Adam unexpectedly becomes heir to a family secret
that sends him to India. Before the two can finally be
united, they will have become involved in significant
historical events in England, India, and the United States.
Violence, strong language, and descriptions of sex. 1991.

The Prospector  BR 9724
by J.M.G. Le Cl‚zio 
3 volumes
In 1892 Alexis and his sister Laure are enjoying an idyllic
childhood in the wild Boucan valley on the island of
Mauritius. Their father has great plans, including building
a power plant, but none comes to fruition. Eventually,
economics drives the family from the valley, but Alexis is
not happy in civilization. Years later, after his father's
death, Alexis returns to the wild to search for gold and
paradise. Some descriptions of sex. 1985.

Redemption  BR 10148
by Leon Uris 
6 volumes
In this sequel to Trinity (BRA 14326, BRA 15339), Uris
continues his account of the Larkins, the Hubbles, and the
Fitzpatricks. Liam Larkin settles in New Zealand and begins
a family, while his brother Conor remains behind to fight
for Irish freedom. Liam's son Rory follows in his uncle's
footsteps, returning to Ireland with a mission of vengeance.
Strong language and some violence. Bestseller 1995.

Sons: Good Earth Trilogy, Volume 2  BR 9578
by Pearl S. Buck 
3 volumes
Sequel to The Good Earth (BR 9400). After Wang Lung's death,
the land that he spent his lifetime acquiring is to be
divided among his three sons. The story revolves mainly
around the third son, a runaway who had become a powerful
military officer, and the use he makes of his inheritance.
1932.

The Travels of Jaimie McPheeters  BR 9581
by Robert Lewis Taylor 
5 volumes
In 1849 Dr. Sardius McPheeters decides to escape his debts
and his genteel wife's disapproval by heading for California
to strike it rich mining gold. Fourteen-year-old Jaimie is
allowed a year off from school to accompany his father. But
almost at once the hapless doctor must write to his wife
that Jaimie is lost and possibly dead. In fact, Jaimie is
captured by murderers in the first of his many adventures.
Some violence. Pulitzer Prize winner. 1958.

The Tree Still Stands  BR 9659
by Mae Briskin 
2 volumes
Ruth was only seven years old when her father made her
responsible for Imma (or Grandma). The scene was Warsaw, and
the Levy family was intact. But the Nazi threat changed
everything. The story of this Jewish family is told from
Ruth's perspective as they flee, first to Paris, then
southward through France to Italy. Their bravery and love
for one another sustain them through tragedies on their
perilous journey. 1991.

The Venetian Mask  BR 9439
by Rosalind Laker 
4 volumes
Marietta's life at the Piet…, a Venetian orphanage and music
school, is happy, thanks to her friend Elena. Then Marietta,
shunned by her true love, is unknowingly promised to a
mysterious man who is linked to her past and is a sworn
enemy of the man Elena is forced to marry. The girls' secret
friendship survives illicit romance, babies switched at
birth, attempted murder, Napoleon's reign, and false
imprisonment. Violence and descriptions of sex. 1993.

War and Peace  BR 9710
by Leo Tolstoy 
14 volumes
First published in 1869, this epic novel deals with Russia
and France at the time of Napoleon Bonaparte. It describes
the invasion of Russia by Napoleon and his army and presents
the author's theories of history. 1869.

The Waterworks  BR 9665
by E.L. Doctorow 
2 volumes
Set in New York City just after the Civil War. Martin
Pemberton is walking in the rain when he spots his father,
whom he believed dead, passing in a horse-drawn omnibus.
When young Pemberton, who writes for a newspaper, tries in
vain to track the omnibus, he disappears. McIlvaine, his
editor and the narrator of this tale, sets off to search for
Pemberton and for answers to a growing set of mysterious
circumstances. Bestseller 1994.

Where Shadows Go: Georgia Trilogy, Volume 2  BR 9375
by Eugenia Price 
5 volumes
After spending the first years of marriage in England, Anne
Fraser has finally convinced her husband John to return to
St. Simons Island. John has difficulty adjusting to owning
slaves, but the couple settle in and begin raising a family.
Their peace is shattered, however, when actress Fanny Kemble
comes to visit and marries the owner of a nearby plantation.
Sequel to Bright Captivity (BR 8538). 1993.

Wings of the Morning: The Kensington Chronicles, Volume 2 
BR 9604
by Lori Wick 
2 volumes
For twenty-three years, Victoria (Smokey) Simmons's life has
been spent on board her father's ship the Aramis. Now he is
dead and she is captain. Dallas Knight, captain of the
Zephyr, often arrives at a port too late to pick up cargo
because the Aramis has gotten there first. He will not be
happy to find out that the Aramis's captain is a woman.
Sequel to The Hawk and the Jewel (BR 9603). 1994.

Human Relationships

America by Land  BR 9526
by Robert Olmstead 
2 volumes
Raymond Romeo Redfield, twenty-three, drops out of college
and heads west to see his cousin Juliet, who knows him
better than anyone. Each has suffered from a heartbreaking
experience, but as these kindred spirits travel together
across America, they find between them a powerful and
undeniable love, a love that will set them on a course to
reclaim the child Juliet gave up for adoption. Strong
language and some descriptions of sex. 1993.

And Do Remember Me  BR 9862
by Marita Golden 
2 volumes
Jessie Foster runs away from her Mississippi home to escape
her father's sexual abuse. She is befriended by Lincoln
Sturgis, who enlists Jessie in Freedom Summer. Jessie also
finds a true friend in activist and scholar Macon Hightower.
After Jessie is a hit in an amateur production of Lincoln's
play, she adopts the name Pearl Moon and leaves for New York
with Lincoln. Some strong language, some violence, and some
explicit descriptions of sex. 1992.

Angel Angel  BR 10253
by April Stevens 
2 volumes
Shortly after Augusta Iris's artist husband leaves her for
another woman, she crawls into bed and stays there. Her
eighteen-year-old son, Henry, finally calls his brother,
Mathew, at Harvard for help. Mathew returns home, but
neither son is equipped to deal with Augusta's depression.
Help comes in the form of Bette Mack, a young woman who
makes a profound impact on each of their lives. Strong
language. 1995.

Another Good Loving Blues  BR 9559
by Arthur Flowers 
2 volumes
In 1918 blues piano player Lucas Bodeen stops his wandering
when he lays eyes on conjure woman Melvira Dupree in the
small town of Sweetwater, Arkansas. But, as Bodeen warns
her, "I ain't never tossed my shoes under no woman's bed for
long. When the blues call, I'm liable to answer." Likewise,
when hoodoo signs call, Melvira answers, and now she's being
called by the mother who abandoned her. Strong language and
some explicit descriptions of sex. 1993.

Benediction at the Savoia  BR 9417
by Christine O'Hagan 
3 volumes
Like Jackie Kennedy, thirty-two-year-old Delia Delaney is
pregnant. Anxious that her two daughters are growing up,
Delia is thrilled about another child. Delia is heartbroken
when Jackie's newborn son dies and worries that her own baby
is late and has stopped moving. She thinks of her wedding to
hard-drinking Irish cop Maurice, the births of her
daughters, her late alcoholic father, and her religious
mother. Strong language and some violence. 1992.

A Bowl of Cherries  BR 9608
by Shena Mackay 
2 volumes
Years ago, while Stanley was imprisoned as a conscientious
objector, his twin, Rex, stole both Stanley's chance at
literary fame and his girl, Daphne. Rex and Daphne now have
a grown daughter, Daisy, who, holding herself responsible
for a long-ago death, puts up with a husband who suffocates
her. But the past is dragged into the present when Rex's
illegitimate teenage son invades the family and demands
things be set right. Some strong language. 1992.

Break the Heart of Me  BR 9776
by Elizabeth Dewberry Vaughn 
2 volumes
As twenty-three-year-old Sylvia Mullins is being seduced by
a country-music singer, her troubled childhood comes to
mind. Her fatally injured teenaged mother is kept alive
until Sylvia is born. Raised by her grandparents, Sylvia
blocks out Paw Paw's molestation. When Memaw dies, Sylvia's
"uncle" admits he is her father. After a disastrous high
school crush, Sylvia marries older, overweight Buddy. Strong
language and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

Breath, Eyes, Memory  BR 9784
by Edwidge Danticat 
2 volumes
Until age twelve, Sophie is raised by her aunt in Haiti. Her
mother then sends for her to come to New York and explains
that Sophie is the product of rape. When a grown Sophie is
befriended by an older musician, her mother tests her
virginity. Sophie rebels by violently deflowering herself,
an act that will later cause her to seek sexual phobia
therapy. She marries the musician and tries to come to terms
with her past as her mother does the same. Some violence.
1994.

Bridie and Finn  BR 9727
by Harry Cauley 
3 volumes
In the 1940s, when Finn is in the fourth grade, Bridie moves
into the house across the street and immediately proclaims
herself to be his best friend. She is a loud, opinionated
girl with self-chopped hair who lives with her hard-drinking
father, Laurie. After Laurie dies and Finn's family
dwindles, Bridie moves in with Finn and his father. The two
friends remain inseparable until Bridie's confession
shatters Finn's dreams. Strong language. 1994.

Called Out  BR 9897
by A.G. Mojtabai 
2 volumes
People of the small town of Bounds, Texas, react to the
crash of a 727 jet carrying ninety-nine people. The widow
whose field the plane lands in marvels that "you can't go
anywhere nowadays without the world raining in on you." The
local priest anoints all passengers regardless of their
religion or condition. A passenger with Alzheimer's disease
wanders lost through the town. And a man shocks his
neighbors by stealing a severed hand. Strong language. 1994.

The Carpetbaggers  BR 10129
by Harold Robbins 
7 volumes
A study of the rise to power of Jonas Cord, a man haunted by
a demanding father and committed to success, regardless of
the consequences. Prequel to The Raiders (BR 10130). Strong
language and explicit descriptions of sex. 1961.

Consider This Home  BR 9801
by Greg Bills 
3 volumes
Kath Miller is living in Las Vegas with her ten-year-old
son, Daron, when her father summons her back to Sterling,
Utah, because Kath's mother has left him. In Sterling, Kath
must also deal with her estranged husband, Merrill, and his
obsession with Mormonism. And Daron gets a chance to meet
Tom, his father, who admitted his homosexuality only after
Kath became pregnant with Daron. Strong language, some
violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

A Cup of Christmas Tea  BR 10231
by Tom Hegg 
1 volume
Shortly before Christmas a young man receives a letter from
a great-aunt asking that he stop in for a cup of Christmas
tea. Although he doesn't want to replace his childhood
memories of her with what she might be like now, he
reluctantly accepts. For senior high and older readers.
1982.

Cured by Fire  BR 10258
by Tim McLaurin 
2 volumes
Elbridge Snipes and Lewis Calhoon live in a homeless shelter
in Seattle, Washington. Similarities in their backgrounds
have brought them together, although each made his way here
by a different route. Both men have lost their families, and
now Elbridge is dying. On the night Elbridge knows will be
his last, Lewis takes him to the top of a nearby hill where
they reminisce about their lives and how they came to be
together. Some strong language. 1995.

Dancer with Bruised Knees  BR 10075
by Lynne McFall 
2 volumes
After Jake leaves Sarah, his new lover takes Sarah's eye out
with a pool cue. Sarah then loses her typing job because she
won't wear a patch. Meanwhile her brother Morgan is accused
of murdering his ex-wife, and their mother kicks out their
father for believing Morgan is guilty. Sarah's therapist
diagnoses her as manic-depressive and prescribes a cure.
Strong language and some violence. 1994.

Decorations in a Ruined Cemetery  BR 9780
by John Gregory Brown 
2 volumes
When Dr. Thomas Eagan leaves his second wife, Catherine, he
reenacts his mother's leave-taking years before. But, unlike
his mother, Thomas takes his children with him. His daughter
Meredith slowly learns the reasons behind both desertions
through letters from Catherine and encounters with Murphy
Warrington, the black man who assisted Thomas's late father
in his cemetery statue business. 1994.

Excuse Me for Asking  BR 9981
by Janis Arnold 
3 volumes
Julia Salwell and Robin Tilton meet as college roommates at
Texas Tech and, although very different in temperament,
begin a lifelong friendship back in Julia's small hometown.
Intellectual Robin doesn't admit that she has nagging doubts
about her aunt's hazy account of the death of Robin's
parents. But surprisingly, outspoken Julia also has a buried
secret that she has never confronted her beloved father
about. Some strong language. 1994.

Fanfan  BR 9888
by Alexandre Jardin 
1 volume
Descended from Robinson Cruso‚, Alexandre is not like other
men. When he discovers his parents' infidelities, Alexandre
dreams of a romance of perpetual expectation and vows to
discipline his urges and be monogamous. He becomes engaged
to stable, if boring, Laure, and then meets Fanfan, who
seems to share his dream. But anticipation of a half-century
of unconsummated seduction is threatened by Fanfan's libido.
Some strong language. 1990.

The Favourite  BR 9892
by Meredith Daneman 
1 volume
As Rosalind attempts to comprehend her husband Frank's
leave-taking, she thinks back to the times her father left.
As her father's favorite daughter, Rosalind's role was to
try to convince him to stay. In her relationship with Frank,
Rosalind was first the other woman, then the wife, and now,
finally, the wife being left for the other woman. Some
strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1993.

A Feather on the Breath of God  BR 10259
by Sigrid Nunez 
2 volumes
The narrator of this tale is the youngest daughter of
mismatched parents. Her half-Chinese, half-Panamanian father
is silent, withdrawn, and a former workaholic who married
her mother, a German, during World War II. They live in the
projects of New York, where her mother tries to make the
best of things. The narrator also attempts to make the best
of her life by studying ballet, but these plans seem doomed
when she falls for an immigrant. 1995.

The Fire Eaters  BR 9738
by William Cobb 
2 volumes
Damon Bell is five when he begins his story of growing up
with his widowed mother, his four siblings, a fruit jar
containing his father's severed ear, and the family secret
of a black grandfather. His mother soon marries Barry, who
has three children and an alcohol problem. After Barry
deserts them, the expanded family struggle along, the mother
marries again, and a grown Damon tries to come to terms with
his family history. Strong language. 1994.

The Gift  BR 9610
by Danielle Steel 
2 volumes
John and Liz Whittaker and their two children--Tom, fifteen,
and Annie, five--seem to be a happy, lucky family. But Annie
dies and the family falls apart. Maribeth Robertson,
sixteen, is pregnant and has been thrown out of her home by
her father. Traveling to Chicago, she stops in the
Whittakers' hometown, meets Tom, and forms a strong
friendship that affects all the Whittakers. Some strong
language and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1994.

Good Girls Don't Wear Trousers  BR 9878
by Lara Cardella 
1 volume
In Sicily young Annetta dreams of being able to wear
trousers. She decides to become a nun, thinking they wear
trousers under their habits like the priests. Then she tries
to become a boy but learns it isn't physically possible.
Next she attempts to become a slut because then she can wear
what she wants. Sent by her enraged parents to live with the
uncle who molested her as a child, Annetta finds a friend in
her unhappy aunt. Some descriptions of sex. 1989.

Guppies for Tea  BR 9850
by Marika Cobbold 
2 volumes
After her husband dies, Selma is put into a nursing home by
her son, who then leaves the country. Although troubled with
senility and incontinence, Selma is adamant about leaving
the home. Her daughter, Dagmar, is too busy obsessively
avoiding germs, so Selma's only chance at freedom comes from
her granddaughter, Amelia. As Amelia's personal life
crumbles around her, she tries to do right by Selma. Some
strong language. 1993.

Gypsy Davey  BR 10213
by Chris Lynch 
1 volume
Davey was raised by his sister Joanne while their mother was
out having a good time. Now Davey is twelve and his sister
is seventeen, with a baby. Davey is oddly quiet, although
inside his head he's talking constantly. But there's another
side to Davey that works perfectly in rhythm on his bike and
that cares for his nephew like "nobody ever loved babies
before." Strong language and some violence. For junior and
senior high and older readers. 1994.

The Hanged Man  BR 10237
by Francesca Lia Block 
1 volume
Seventeen-year-old Laurel lives at the top of a canyon in
Los Angeles. Waiting in a hospital for her father's death,
she meets Jack, who befriends her. Jack also introduces
Laurel to a fast-paced lifestyle. Meanwhile, Laurel slowly
confronts a lot of strange things going on in her life.
Descriptions of sex and some strong language. For high
school and older readers. 1994.

A Heartbeat Away  BR 9673
by Barbara Rogan 
3 volumes
Life is hectic in Mercy Hospital's emergency room,
especially with a little drama among the staff. Crow
Durango, housekeeper, gets the attention of Dr. Thomas
Graystone, emergency room chief, when a deceased doctor
gives her a diagnosis that saves two patients. Alice
Straugh, a white nurse, wants to adopt a badly abused black
child. Then there is Pilar, who keeps things moving, and
Plummer, a doctor with no bedside manner. Strong language.
1993.

Hello Down There  BR 9671
by Michael Parker 
2 volumes
In 1952, after the car wreck that claimed his fianc‚e's
life, Edwin is addicted to morphine prescribed by his uncle.
He lives a reclusive life in his North Carolina hometown
until he becomes obsessed with young Eureka. When the
druggist is fired for refusing Edwin's wealthy mother's
demands to supply the drug, Edwin tries to kick the habit as
he slowly reveals his story to Eureka. Some strong language
and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1993.

Home and Away  BR 9985
by Joanne Meschery 
3 volumes
While her ski-champion husband is (as usual) off trying to
set another world record, California border inspector Hedy
Gallagher Castle struggles with changes in her life and in
the world. A new sportswriter insists he's in love with her,
her minister father is trying to recover from a stroke, her
daughter has been moved up to the varsity basketball team,
Operation Desert Storm begins, and the religious right seems
to be taking over. Some strong language. 1994.

Hula  BR 9633
by Lisa Shea 
1 volume
A ten-year-old girl and her slightly older sister fill their
summer days with imaginative activities in their backyard.
One is to hula dance the way their mother taught them. But
their father takes away the grass skirts their mother brings
home from the dance studio. Disturbed since the Vietnam War,
their father is prone to rages and shooting sprees, so the
girls are careful to stay out of his way. Some violence. For
high school and older readers. 1994.

I Been in Sorrow's Kitchen and Licked Out All the Pots  BR
9398
by Susan Straight 
4 volumes
At fourteen, Marietta Cook is already as tall as a man, with
blue-black skin and the speech cadence of her rural
community. When her mother dies, Marietta tries Charleston
rather than weave sweet grass baskets. Returning pregnant,
she learns her home is being restored as part of a
plantation tourist attraction. Disillusioned, she returns
with her twin boys to the modern world. Strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1992.

I Hadn't Meant to Tell You This  BR 9898
by Jacqueline Woodson 
1 volume
Twelve-year-old Marie is a popular eighth grader in a
predominantly African American class when Lena, a poor white
girl, arrives. Because both girls have lost their mothers,
they are soon drawn to one another. Then Lena reveals that
her father is molesting her. Marie refuses to believe her,
but once Marie gets over the shock, she begins to ask
questions and to try to help Lena find a way out of her
tragic situation. For junior and senior high and older
readers. 1994.

In Troubled Waters  BR 9720
by Beverly Coyle 
3 volumes
Ninety-one-year-old Tom Glover now shares his family home
with his daughter Lois and her husband, Paul, who has
Alzheimer's disease. Sitting on his front porch, Tom can
keep an eye on Paul and watch the group of rambunctious boys
that fish at the edge of his land. Ted, the one black boy,
reminds Tom of Lucky, a long-ago friend. When Tom hires Ted
to take Paul fishing, the resulting community furor recalls
Lucky's years-ago tragedy. Some strong language. 1993.

A Map of the World  BR 9800
by Jane Hamilton 
4 volumes
School nurse Alice Goodwin and her dairy farmer husband,
Howard, are never truly accepted by the small community of
Prairie Center. When the daughter of Alice's one friend,
Theresa, dies after falling in the Goodwin's pond, the town
turns vicious. Alice is accused of sexually molesting a
troubled young boy in her school. As Alice awaits trial in
jail, Theresa helps a stunned Howard cope at home. Strong
language and some descriptions of sex. 1994.

Nobody's Fool  BR 9783
by Richard Russo 
6 volumes
Don Sullivan, known in North Bath, New York, as Sully, is
about the unluckiest man in this unlucky town. At sixty, he
is divorced, able to do only piecemeal work because of an
injury, and living in a flat owned by his former
eighth-grade teacher, Miss Beryl. The day before
Thanksgiving 1980, Sully is offered a job by his old
construction boss. It just might be the chance to regain his
son's respect. Strong language and some descriptions of sex.
1993.

Orlando: A Biography  BR 9501
by Virginia Woolf 
2 volumes
Fantasy about a young Elizabethan nobleman who, by book's
end, has been transformed into a young woman. The author
examines English literary and social history through the
three hundred years of Orlando's life, and the
transformation emphasizes Woolf's belief that women are the
intellectual equals of men. 1928.

Out of Control  BR 10096
by Norma Fox Mazer 
1 volume
High school football star Rollo, student senator Candy, and
honor society president Brig are inseparable. So when Brig
teases art student Valerie, the other two go along. But when
the three fondle her in the hall and Valerie goes to the
principal, Rollo becomes confused. He tries to make Valerie
see that he's really a nice guy but begins to see himself
through her eyes. Some strong language. For junior and
senior high and older readers. 1993.

Rocking the Babies  BR 10246
by Linda Raymond 
2 volumes
Although Martha and Nettie Lee are both older African
American women who volunteer to rock premature babies at a
hospital, they dislike each other from the start. Martha
wants to become a foster mother for a preemie abandoned in a
Port-a-Potty. She doesn't realize that Nettie Lee is the
child's grandmother, who is staying anonymous to protect her
daughter. As the two women tell stories and befriend a young
mother, they grow closer. Strong language. 1994.

Secrets of Paris  BR 9740
by Luanne Rice 
3 volumes
Shortly after her father shocks Lydie and her mother by
shooting himself and a woman he secretly loved, Lydie's
husband, Michael, gets a year-long assignment in Paris.
Upset when Lydie is unable to enjoy the romance of the city,
Michael falls in love with a colleague. Meanwhile, Lydie has
finally made friends: an American married to a Frenchman and
their Filipino housekeeper. Strong language and some
explicit descriptions of sex. 1991.

Selling the Lite of Heaven  BR 9847
by Suzanne Strempek Shea 
3 volumes
When Eddie Balicki asks the thirtyish daughter of Polish
immigrants to marry him, she is thrilled. But just before
the wedding, Eddie gets a call to become a Catholic priest.
His jilted fianc‚e places an ad in the PennySaver to sell
the engagement ring, which the paper calls "the lite of
heaven." Over the next year, she interviews an odd string of
possible buyers and reflects on the events that led up to
this debacle. 1994.

The Shipping News  BR 9612
by E. Annie Proulx 
3 volumes
The story centers around Quoyle, a lowly newspaper reporter.
When his wife, Petal Bear, runs off with another man and
gets killed, Quoyle's aunt convinces the distraught man to
move with his two daughters to an abandoned family home in
Newfoundland. Quoyle goes to work for a sleazy paper
covering the shipping news and learns to fit right in.
Strong language. 1993.

Silk Hope, NC  BR 10115
by Lawrence Naumoff 
2 volumes
While Frannie is away on a three-day romp with various men,
her mother dies. Frannie's sister, Natalie, and her fianc‚,
Jake, intensify the blow by informing Frannie they want to
sell the farmhouse and surrounding acres. A female ancestor
willed the land to stay in the hands of the family's women
so they would always have a place to live. To keep her
sanctuary, Frannie must somehow manage to buy out Natalie's
share. Some strong language. 1994.

Singing Songs  BR 9900
by Meg Tilly 
2 volumes
When Anna is four, her father takes her older brother and
leaves her mother and the four youngest children. Mama
marries Richard, who moves in with three children of his
own. Mama quits work, but they don't become a typical
family. They fight a lot, they move to avoid social workers,
and everyone calls Mama a "hoor." Worse, Richard insists on
giving Anna and her sisters kissing lessons. Strong
language, explicit descriptions of sex, and some violence.
1994.

Sleepwalking  BR 10263
by Julie Myerson 
2 volumes
Struggling artist Susan marries successful Alistair but is
soon unhappy. Eight months pregnant, she resolves leave him
when she falls in love with another artist. Meanwhile,
Susan's cruel father commits suicide, and his ghost as an
unhappy child begins to haunt her. Intertwined with Susan's
story is that of her grandmother Queenie, who failed
miserably as a mother and wife. Strong language and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1994.

The Slow Natives  BR 9564
by Thea Astley 
2 volumes
The Australian Leverson family consists of affable music
teacher Bernard; his wife, Iris; and their sullen son,
Keith. Bernard really doesn't mind when he learns that Iris
is having an affair, but for Keith it is definitely the last
straw. Keith loathes everything about his parents even
though he loves them, and he secretly admits he could use
some disciplining. A last act of rebellion finally tests his
parents' limits. Strong language. 1965.

Sula  BR 9661
by Toni Morrison 
1 volume
Set in an Ohio community called the Bottom, the novel
follows two friends, Sula and Nel, from childhood to old age
and death. Some strong language and explicit descriptions of
sex. 1973.

Taft  BR 10136
by Ann Patchett 
2 volumes
Drummer John Nickel becomes manager of Muddy's, a Memphis
bar, after his son Franklin is born. When Franklin's mother
moves him to Florida, the void in John's life is filled by
young Fay, who applies to be a waitress, and her troubled
brother, Carl. As John becomes entangled in their lives and
fantasizes about what their late father was like, he
realizes it is impossible to keep everyone safe. Strong
language and some violence. 1994.

Talk before Sleep  BR 9860
by Elizabeth Berg 
2 volumes
Ruth and Ann have been close friends for about five years
when Ruth is diagnosed with breast cancer. Ann, a former
nurse, puts her own life on hold to help Ruth cope with the
debilitating illness and face the approach of death. They
spend the last poignant months talking about their
friendship and socializing with Ruth's group of friends.
Strong language. 1994.

Tortilla Flat  BR 10108
by John Steinbeck 
2 volumes
The setting is Danny's house in a tumbledown section of
Monterey, California. Pilon, Pablo, Jesus Maria Corcoran,
Big Joe Portagee, and the old pirate--Danny's friends--are
paisanos of mixed Spanish, Indian, Mexican, and assorted
Caucasian bloods. They are also generally amoral vagabonds
with soft hearts and no scruples. 1935.

The Track of Real Desires  BR 9815
by Beverly Lowry 
2 volumes
Ten days before her scheduled breast biopsy, fiftyish Leland
Standard visits her hometown of Eunola, Mississippi, with
her gay son, Toby. They stay with Leland's friends Mell and
Baker Farrish, who are still reeling over the suicide of
their daughter. As other friends bring their troubled lives
to the welcome-home dinner party, they all ponder how they
got so far off the track of real desires. Strong language
and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

The Tracks of Angels  BR 9773
by Kelly Dwyer 
2 volumes
The afternoon of her father's funeral, young Laura Neuman
takes a Greyhound bus from California to Boston to start a
new life. Shaking off the creepy feeling that she's being
watched, Laura takes a waitressing job and begins to educate
herself with an encyclopedia. A slightly irritable angel
appears in Laura's apartment, as Laura thinks back on the
sad events that led her to Boston. Some strong language and
some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

Tunnel of Love  BR 10084
by Hilma Wolitzer 
3 volumes
In this sequel to Hearts (BR 4651), Linda
Reismann--twenty-seven, newly widowed, and pregnant--and
Robin, her thirteen-year-old stepdaughter, have just arrived
in Los Angeles. They hope to begin a new life and establish
a less volatile relationship. But fate has more trouble in
store for both--robbery, murder, a car accident, and a
custody battle. Strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 1994.

Under the Silk Cotton Tree  BR 9594
by Jean Buffong 
2 volumes
Beginning and ending with the account of the wedding of her
two admired teachers, a "fete for so," young Flora gives a
fast-paced, rambling account of the highs and lows of her
life thus far on Grenada. She lives with her mother and
siblings after her father leaves for St. Croix to strike it
rich and never returns. Some strong language. For high
school and older readers. 1993.

The Virgin Suicides  BR 9600
by Jeffrey Eugenides 
2 volumes
The neighborhood boys are obsessed with the five Lisbon
sisters. The boys are attending the strict Lisbons' first
party when thirteen-year-old Cecilia Lisbon succeeds in her
second attempt to kill herself. They are on hand again a
year later when the other sisters follow Cecilia's lead.
Even after the boys become men, they still try to sort out
what happened and why. Strong language, violence, and some
explicit descriptions of sex. 1993.

Virtual Love  BR 9891
by Avodah Offit 
3 volumes
New York sex therapists Aphra and Marc begin corresponding
by e-mail after Marc moves to the West Coast and needs
advice on treating a patient he has sexual feelings for. The
relationship between Aphra and Marc (both married) soon
becomes more than friendship. When Marc returns to New York
for his father's funeral, he reads the lengthy passages
Aphra has never sent him, and the two discover an
astonishing fact. Strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 1994.

Water  BR 9840
by Sue Thomas 
2 volumes
Professor Ruth Murdoch's husband, Simon, left her for
another woman when their daughter, Julie, was three. After
one heartbreaking affair, Ruth settles for an imaginary
lover. Dismayed at the havoc Simon has wreaked on their
lives, Julie eventually has the opportunity to confront him.
Although Julie hates to swim, water surfaces again and again
throughout the story. Some strong language, some violence,
and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

The Waters of Thirst  BR 9717
by Adam Mars-Jones 
2 volumes
William is a gay British actor who works doing voice-overs,
has a monogamous live-in relationship with an airline
worker, and suffers from kidney disease. William humorously
describes his bittersweet life: elaborate dinner parties,
encounters with the couple's strange neighbors and friends,
his obsession with a pornographic model, and his hope that a
careless motorcyclist will provide a kidney. Strong language
and some descriptions of sex. 1993.

The Weekend  BR 10076
by Peter Cameron 
2 volumes
Fortyish art critic Lyle is taking his new lover, Robert, to
visit friends Marian and John in the country for the
weekend. On the train, Lyle explains that a year ago his
lover Tony, who was John's half brother, died at this house.
Meanwhile, Marian is puzzled that Lyle would bring a guest
on this anniversary, and another weekend guest must justify
her plans when her daughter unexpectedly pays her a visit.
Some strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1994.

Why Sarah Ran Away with the Veterinarian  BR 10068
by Liz Newall 
2 volumes
A year after forty-year-old Sarah leaves her husband of
twenty years for her horse's veterinarian, she and her
family separately discuss the subject. Because her mother is
dying, Sarah has returned home to her husband. She is
pregnant after many miscarriages, and her husband believes
the baby is his, despite his vasectomy. And Sarah's aunt
reveals family history that sheds light on Sarah's
adventure. Some strong language. 1994.

The Wind Blows Backward  BR 9988
by Mary Downing Hahn 
2 volumes
Members of the popular crowd at Lauren's high school call
her "Mouse" if they notice her at all. When Spencer, a
fellow book lover and her secret crush in middle school,
joined that crowd she gave up on him. But now, in their
senior year, Spencer is starting to talk to her again. When
they begin to date, Lauren quickly falls in love, despite
Spencer's and others' warnings that he has problems. Some
strong language. For high school and older readers. 1993.

Humor

Carry On, Jeeves  BR 9533
by P.G. Wodehouse 
1 volume
Ten stories about the adventures of the irresponsible Bertie
Wooster and his indispensable valet, Jeeves. Bertie recalls
the morning he hired Jeeves on the spot, thanks to Jeeves's
ability to produce a hangover cure. The incomparable valet
proves himself time and again as he copes with uninvited
houseguests, patches up broken romances, and listens
politely to Bertie's harebrained schemes. 1925.

The Cover Artist  BR 9561
by Paul Micou 
2 volumes
Satire on the art world. Oscar Lemoine, a cartoonist and
caricaturist, and his dog Elizabeth return to New York after
escaping for more than a year in the south of France. Known
for his wicked nude drawings of public figures on the cover
of Lowdown, Oscar fled in confusion when he belatedly
learned that the magazine was pornographic. But the peace he
found abroad was short-lived when he fell in love with a
manipulative woman. Descriptions of sex and some strong
language. 1990.

Di and I  BR 10276
by Peter Lefcourt 
3 volumes
Leonard Schecter has been given the opportunity to write the
script for a television series about England's royal family.
Entranced by Princess Di, he woos her by promising to write
an epic poem about her. Leonard and Di are besotted with one
another, and Di packs up the two princes and heads to
California for a life with Leonard. Strong language. 1994.

Guest of a Sinner  BR 9725
by James Wilcox 
3 volumes
Fortyish pianist Eric Thorsen's life is disrupted by the
elderly woman and her odoriferous twenty-odd cats in the
apartment beneath his in New York. While trying to bring
action against her, Eric seeks refuge in his older sister's
basement apartment but is annoyed by the appearance of his
pushy father. To escape, Eric agrees to house-sit the
apartment of adoring Wanda Skopinski. What follows is a
series of humorous mix-ups. Strong language. 1993.

It Is Not Now: Tales of Maine  BR 10168
by John Gould 
2 volumes
Yarns about everyday small-town life with a regional accent.
Octogenarian Gould, former columnist for the Christian
Science Monitor, recalls days when "eyah" closed a deal. He
can get into arguments over why anybody would need to
replace permanent antifreeze, and he is pleased when a
youngster expresses interest in a sled Gould is fixing,
until the boy announces, "We can use my father's snowmobile
to pull it back uphill!" 1993.

Laughing Gas  BR 10210
by P.G. Wodehouse 
2 volumes
Reginald, the third earl of Havershot, goes to Hollywood to
prevent the ill-contemplated marriage of his cousin
Egremont. The earl encounters even greater difficulties when
he accidentally ends up changing places--and bodies--with a
famous, but spoiled, child movie star. 1936.

Once upon a More Enlightened Time: More Politically Correct
Bedtime Stories  BR 10132
by James Finn Garner 
1 volume
In the sequel to Politically Correct Bedtime Stories (BR
9870), Garner once more provides fairytales without biases.
Hansel and Gretal become ecoheroes who turn their tree-
butcher father into a beaver. In "The Little Mer-Persun,"
the air breather sacrifices his peopleness and becomes half
prawn to be with his mer-person underwater. Bestseller 1995.

What's Wrong with America  BR 10109
by Scott Bradfield 
2 volumes
Emma O'Hallahan begins a journal to explain to her relatives
and assorted genetic riff-raff why she shot her husband,
Marvin, and buried him in the back yard. During the writing,
flustered by a little too much brandy and the constant
appearances of her annoying husband's ghost, Emma discovers
she has also buried a nosy neighbor. When she finds a third
grave, she fears she has gone too far. Strong language.
1994.

Mystery and Detective

Alibi for an Actress  BR 10134
by Gillian B. Farrell 
2 volumes
In this prequel to Murder and a Muse (BR 10121), struggling
actress Annie McGrogan offers her services to flashy private
detective Duke DeNobili. When he assigns her to help protect
soap opera actress Lucinda Merrill, Annie is proud of her
realistic portrayal of a private eye and grateful for the
easy money. But things get complicated when Merrill's
husband is killed and Lucinda is a suspect. Strong language.
1992.

The Angel Gang: Tom Hickey Trilogy, Book 3  BR 10190
by Ken Kuhlken 
2 volumes
After rescuing childlike Wendy from a Tijuana dive in The
Loud Adios (BR 9977), ex-private eye Tom Hickey took her to
his Tahoe retreat and eventually married her. Now that Wendy
is about to give birth, Hickey is frustrated that she
insists he leave town to help a past acquaintance beat a
murder rap. His frustration turns to horror when Wendy is
kidnapped. Strong language and some violence. 1994.

Bertie and the Crime of Passion  BR 10305
by Peter Lovesey 
2 volumes
Paris, 1891. Bertie, prince of Wales, has just arrived in
Paris when Sarah Bernhardt informs him that the intended
son-in-law of his good friend Jules d'Agincourt has been
murdered. Bertie enlists Sarah's help, and they are soon off
to the Moulin Rouge, where the murder occurred. 1993.

Blackening Song  BR 10348
by Aimee and David Thurlo 
3 volumes
Ella Clah left the Navajo reservation to join the FBI and
start a new life. When her father is murdered, she returns,
against FBI rules, to the "Rez" to investigate. Her brother,
a medicine man, is considered a suspect. In trying to clear
his name, Ella feels the tug of two cultures and two ways of
life. She must discover her own identity as she seeks that
of the murderer. Some violence and some strong language.
1995.

The Body in the Cornflakes  BR 9676
by K.K. Beck 
2 volumes
Just before the grand reopening of his Galaxy Foods
supermarket, old Karl Krogstad announces his engagement to
the store's television model--Ginger of the enhanced
bustline. When Ginger's body is found in the cornflakes
display, assistant manager Ted Constantino suspects
everyone: Karl's daughter-in-law, who thinks Ginger slept
with her husband, Junior; Junior himself; and their spoiled
son, Lance, who wants the store. Some strong language. 1992.

The Bold Thing  BR 9712
by Mark Daniel 
3 volumes
Micky Brennan was a horseman before he was sent to Her
Majesty's prison for running someone down while drunk and
drugged. Now free, Micky, shunned by old acquaintances,
reluctantly agrees to go back home to Ireland to run a
disabled American woman's horse farm. But Micky's troubles
are not over: the woman is being pressured to pay extortion
for being a "guest of Ireland." Strong language, violence,
and explicit descriptions of sex. 1990.

The Cat Who Said Cheese  BR 10344
by Lilian Jackson Braun 
2 volumes
It is autumn in Pickax City, and Qwill, along with other
residents, is preparing for the Great Food Expo--a festival
of all kinds of happenings related to food. There is also a
mysterious female guest at the New Pickax Hotel whose
presence is causing quite a stir. But things really get
hectic when a bomb explodes in the hotel and the intended
victim seems to be the mystery guest. As usual, Siamese cats
Koko and Yum Yum help solve the crime. Bestseller 1996.

Chosen for Death  BR 10182
by Kate Clark Flora 
2 volumes
At her sister Carrie's funeral, Thea Kozak vows to find
Carrie's murderer. Adopted as a newborn, twenty-one-year-old
Carrie was waitressing in Maine and searching for her birth
mother when she was killed. Detective Andre Lemieux seems
dedicated to the case but can find no motive for the brutal
attack. Hoping to find a lead, Thea retraces Carrie's
search. Strong language, violence, and some descriptions of
sex. 1994.

Dance Hall of the Dead  BR 10352
by Tony Hillerman 
2 volumes
Navajo police lieutenant Joe Leaphorn faces a mystery and a
possible murder in the disappearance of a Zuni youth and his
Navajo best friend shortly before an important annual Zuni
religious ceremony. Beliefs, motivations, and actions of
characters reveal the differences between the Navajo and
Zuni cultures. 1973.

Dead End Game  BR 9875
by Christopher Newman 
2 volumes
The night before the most important World Series game,
Kansas City Royals pitcher Willie Cintron foolishly brings a
woman back to his New York hotel room. Before the night is
over, she has injected a drugged Cintron with a fatal dose
of heroin. Hearing about Cintron's death, a friend refuses
to believe the ballplayer returned to the "dead end game" of
his old New York crowd. And NYPD lieutenant Joe Dante
agrees. Violence and strong language. 1994.

Dead Man's Island  BR 9684
by Carolyn G. Hart 
2 volumes
Retired newspaper reporter Henrietta O'Dwyer Collins (Henrie
O.) is surprised to be summoned by her long-ago lover,
powerful Chase Prescott. Chase has also invited all of his
close associates and family to the island he owns to
determine with Henrie O. which of them tried to murder him.
This task is made more difficult by a hurricane like the one
that gave Dead Man's Island its name. Strong language and
violence. 1993.

Death among the Dons  BR 9679
by Janet Neel 
2 volumes
Francesca Wilson McLeish, wife of police superintendent John
McLeish, is at home on maternity leave. But the baby cries
all the time, and Francesca is miserable. When Dr. Judith
Symonds, warden of Gladstone College, is murdered, the
college hires Francesca as bursar to straighten out suspect
accounts. Then someone else dies, and Francesca almost
becomes a victim herself. 1993.

Death in Disguise  BR 9842
by Caroline Graham 
3 volumes
Most everyone in the village of Compton Dando is of the
opinion that the members of the commune who occupy the Manor
House are a peculiar lot. Curiosity increases when the body
of the group's spiritual leader is discovered. And life
becomes very interesting for Chief Inspector Barnaby and
Sergeant Troy as the number of murders grows. Some strong
language. 1993.

Death of a Glutton  BR 9704
by M.C. Beaton 
2 volumes
Excitement comes to the Scottish village of Lochdubh when a
singles club visits. Run by efficient Maria Worth, the club
attempts to find spouses for the wealthy. Maria's hopes for
this group are dashed, however, when her obnoxious business
partner, obese Peta Gore, decides to join the club and
disgusts everyone with her overeating and bad personality.
When Peta is found murdered, policeman Hamish Macbeth is not
short of suspects. Some strong language. 1993.

Decider  BR 9448
by Dick Francis 
3 volumes
As shareholders examine the grandstands of a run-down
family-owned racetrack, an explosion nearly kills Lee
Morris, whose stock in the track was part of his mother's
divorce settlement. It is not the first such incident to
befall Morris, a young architect who specializes in doing
restorations, and he intends to find out who is behind this
attack. Bestseller 1993.

Degree of Guilt  BR 9811
by Richard North Patterson 
5 volumes
Distinguished attorney Christopher Paget is raising his
fifteen-year-old son Carlo. Carlo's estranged mother,
television journalist Mary Carelli, is in town to interview
novelist Mark Ransom but instead is accused of his murder.
Not only does her story of Ransom's rape attempt have some
inconsistencies for Paget and his assistant to sort out, it
also involves a surprising group of well-known people.
Violence and some explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller
1992.

Dreamboat  BR 10170
by Doug J. Swanson 
2 volumes
Private investigator Jack Flippo has come to Baggett County,
Texas, to uncover the real cause of Mingo Gideon's death.
Apparently Mingo and Rex Echols, his partner in the Melon
Patch Ranch Bar, were out on Lake Dolph Briscoe when Mingo
fell out of the boat and drowned. But is that what really
happened? After all, Rex had just taken out a large
insurance policy on Mingo. Some strong language. 1995.

Edsel: A Novel of Detroit  BR 10156
by Loren D. Estleman 
2 volumes
Estleman's fourth Detroit novel, following King of the
Corner (BR 9357), is set in the 1950s. Former newspaperman
Connie Minor now works in advertising and has been asked to
secretly create an ad campaign for the new Edsel car. But
Minor runs into problems when some people, especially the
UAW leader, begin to think Minor is a spy for management or
the competition. Strong language and some violence. 1995.

The Father Hunt: A Nero Wolfe Mystery  BR 9532
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
Amy Denovo asks private investigator Nero Wolfe's assistant,
Archie Goodwin, to find out who her father is and
reluctantly agrees to hire Wolfe if Archie (the only man she
trusts) does the actual work. After her mother's recent
death, Amy learned that this unknown father has been sending
money for years. Archie learns that Amy's mother was just as
much a mystery as her father. Some strong language. 1968.

Fatlands  BR 10147
by Sarah Dunant 
2 volumes
Private investigator Hannah Wolfe is assigned to chaperone
Mattie Shepherd, fourteen, on a birthday excursion to
London. Her father, a research scientist, had promised to
take Mattie but was too busy. When Mattie goes to get a
theater guide from her father's car, the car explodes,
killing her. The police assume the scientist was the
intended victim and suspect animal-rights activists. But
Hannah wants to investigate. Strong language and violence.
1993.

Fer-de-Lance: A Nero Wolfe Mystery  BR 9653
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
Nero Wolfe and Archie Goodwin make their debut in this first
of many tales about the corpulent master sleuth who operates
out of a New York brownstone. When Wolfe receives the gift
of a deadly snake, his assistant suspects that they are onto
the clever person who murdered an Italian immigrant and a
college president, although he cannot imagine what
connection there may be. 1934.

A Grave Talent  BR 9843
by Laurie R. King 
3 volumes
When Casey Martinelli transfers to a San Francisco precinct,
she is paired with Alonzo Hawkin on a serial killing case.
The bodies of three little girls have been found in an odd
colony outside of the city. When their investigation quickly
reveals that one colony resident is a convicted
child-murderer, the obvious conclusion seems too pat. And to
both detectives, famous painter Vaun Adams seems an
incongruous serial killer. Strong language and some
violence. 1993.

Growing Light  BR 9974
by Martha Conley 
2 volumes
When her husband dies in a car crash, Anne Munro accepts a
job at Growing Light, despite her misgivings about its
abrasive New Age owner, George Ashby, and his kooky staff.
The firm develops garden and farm management systems
software and hardware attuned to the owners' biorhythms.
When Ashby is killed on Anne's first day at work, she is
shocked to learn that, though Ashby had many enemies, she is
the primary suspect. Strong language. 1993.

The Grub-and-Stakers House a Haunt  BR 9746
by Alisa Craig 
2 volumes
Widow Zilla Trott is in her kitchen making a cup of camomile
tea for herself and her cat when the ghost of Hiram Jellyby
suddenly appears. He was murdered some years ago, and he
wants Zilla to find his bones and bury them decently so he
can rest in peace. Hiram also wants her to look for a wooden
box of gold that he buried. When Zilla and her friends begin
digging, they uncover more than bones and gold. 1993.

The Horse You Came In On  BR 9546
by Martha Grimes 
3 volumes
An old acquaintance asks Scotland Yard's Richard Jury to go
to Baltimore and investigate a young man's death. Jury takes
along Wiggins and his friend Plant who has, coincidentally,
been summoned by a Baltimore author friend whose student was
murdered while researching Poe. Following conveniently left
clues suggesting that the two murders and one more are
connected, the three immerse themselves in humorous
Baltimore sleuthing. Some strong language. 1993.

A Hovering of Vultures  BR 9813
by Robert Barnard 
2 volumes
The Sneddon Fellowship is having its inaugural weekend bash
at the Sneddon farmhouse in West Yorkshire. The late
Sneddons were brother and sister authors, and Joshua Sneddon
was said to have killed Susannah in a jealous snit and then
killed himself. Elderly attendee Mrs. Farraday, a former
resident, is shocked to find that her ancient, obnoxious
mother not only is still alive but remembers something
crucial about the elusive Sneddons. 1993.

In a Pig's Eye  BR 9750
by Robert Campbell 
2 volumes
Jimmy Flannery, sewer inspector, has just become the
Democratic councilman for Ward Twenty-Seven. His wife, Mary,
a nurse working with pregnant women, is herself expecting.
While Flannery works out at his club one day, a man known
only as P. Pig drops dead. Of course Flannery wants to know
who he is and why he died, especially when the cops tell him
to butt out. Some strong language. 1991.

The Innocents  BR 10269
by Richard Barre 
2 volumes
A flash flood uncovers a small skeleton in the California
desert. The remains of six more children are found nearby.
Successful restaurateur Ignacio Reyes is horrified to
discover one of the children is his own. Benito was given up
for adoption to wealthy Americans in 1967 when Reyes was
destitute in Mexico. Now Reyes calls in private investigator
Wil Hardesty to help avenge the child's death. Strong
language and violence. 1995.

Justice for Some  BR 9728
by Kate Wilhelm 
2 volumes
Sarah Drexler takes a break from filling her deceased
husband's judgeship in Oregon and travels to California for
a family reunion. There she finds her son, her daughter, and
her father are all very secretive. After her father's body
is found floating in the pool, Sarah learns that he had
hired a detective. When the detective is found murdered,
Sarah's entire family begins to look suspicious. Some strong
language and some violence. 1993.

Kid's Stuff  BR 10214
by Susan B. Kelly 
2 volumes
After Detective Chief Inspector Nick Trevellyan arrests
Arturo Bottone for selling child pornography, the inspector
is frustrated to find no clues leading to Bottone's other
clients or the photographer of the pornography. Meanwhile
Bottone's estranged wife is coping admirably with the fact
that Bottone hanged himself after the arrest, but the
harassed wife of Bottone's arrested client is not doing as
well. Strong language. 1994.

"K" Is for Killer  BR 9880
by Sue Grafton 
3 volumes
P.I. Kinsey Millhone is hired by Janice Kepler to
investigate the death of her daughter Lorna after the police
all but give up on the baffling case. The body is so badly
decomposed that it is impossible to determine if Lorna has
been murdered. Kinsey shifts to night hours to find a motive
when she learns that Lorna's part-time job and crude cabin
belied a high-dollar hooking career and large savings
account. Some strong language. Bestseller 1994.

The Lethal Partner  BR 10351
by Jake Page 
2 volumes
Blind Santa Fe artist Mo Bowdre, from The Stolen Gods (BR
10360), once again becomes involved in a murder
investigation. Shortly after gallery owner Elijah Potts
announces he has seven previously unknown Georgia O'Keeffe
paintings, his gallery manager is killed and the paintings
disappear. When Potts is arrested for her murder, he turns
to Bowdre, who discovers a complex web of deceit and
backstabbing. Strong language. 1996.


"L" Is for Lawless  BR 10162
by Sue Grafton 
3 volumes
Following "K" Is for Killer (BR 9880), P.I. Kinsey Millhone
has a week off to help with the wedding of her landlord
Henry's elderly brother. But Henry has another favor to ask.
Neighbor Johnny Lee has passed away, and his relatives are
trying to get the army to pay for the funeral, but the army
has no record of Mr. Lee. The case takes Kinsey on a
cross-country chase for a hidden treasure. Some strong
language and some violence. Bestseller 1995.

The Loud Adios: Tom Hickey Trilogy, Book 2  BR 9977
by Ken Kuhlken 
2 volumes
In 1943, shortly after his wife leaves taking their daughter
with her, thirty-six-year-old California private eye Tom
Hickey is drafted. On his post at the Mexican border, Hickey
is approached by a young soldier who wants help rescuing his
sister. Childlike Wendy Rose dances nude in a Tijuana club
whose owner has an odd control over her. Hickey's attempt to
retrieve her reveals a Nazi plot. Precedes The Angel Gang
(BR 10190). Violence and some strong language. 1991.

Love Lies  BR 9886
by Fern Kupfer 
3 volumes
Fran Meltzer; her best friend, Julia Markem; and Julia's
husband, Tyler, all teach at the same college. When Julia
discovers Tyler is having an affair with one of his
students, he shows no remorse and even blames Julia. Soon
after, Tyler dies while weight lifting. Fran, who always
disliked Tyler, is shocked to learn that the police suspect
Julia may have killed him, but is pleased to assist the
intriguing detective. Some strong language. 1994.

Madame Maigret's Own Case  BR 9537
by Georges Simenon 
2 volumes (Reissue)
Before her regular dentist appointment, Madame Maigret is in
the park, passing the time with the nice lady who is always
there with her small son. This time the lady asks Madame
Maigret to watch the child for a moment but doesn't return
for two hours. When Madame Maigret tells the inspector about
her annoying afternoon, both are unaware that she is
providing him with a clue in his frustrating,
well-publicized case about the body in the bookbinder's
furnace. 1959.

The Mountain Cat Murders  BR 9655
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
In Cody, Wyoming, young Delia Brand has a mission: to find
and kill the man who murdered her father. Delia's mother has
just committed suicide after spending the family money
trying to do the same thing. But after Delia buys cartridges
for her father's gun and more or less admits her plan, she
can't find the gun. Then her father's business associate is
shot, and things look bad for Delia. Some strong language.
1939.

The Moving Target: A Lew Archer Novel  BR 9538
by Ross Macdonald 
2 volumes
Investigator Lew Archer is hired by paraplegic Mrs. Sampson
to find her much older husband. He's only been missing a
day, but she doesn't want him to get drunk and give away
more of the money she hopes to acquire when she outlives
him. Accompanying Archer are Mr. Sampson's daughter and
pilot. As Archer sniffs out a weak clue that leads to a
suspicious Hollywood crowd, a ransom note arrives. Strong
language and violence. 1949.

Murder and a Muse  BR 10121
by Gillian B. Farrell 
2 volumes
Actress Annie McGrogan works as a private investigator
between auditions until she lands a role in Alan DeLucca's
movie. McGrogan is attracted to the married director and
spends time alone with him on location. When DeLucca's
family shows up, DeLucca is found dead before he can smooth
things out. McGrogan reluctantly reverts to her role as
detective when she learns she is the prime suspect. Strong
language. 1994.

Murder by the Numbers: An Eliot Ness Novel  BR 9672
by Max Allan Collins 
2 volumes
Cleveland, Ohio, 1938. Five years ago, black cop Toussaint
Johnson watched as numbers king Rufus Murphy, for whom he
was doing some "unofficial" work, was shot to death. Eliot
Ness, director of public safety, has a reputation for
putting bad guys in jail, and he is counting on Johnson's
help in shutting down the numbers racket. But he doesn't
know that Johnson was once "on the pad." Strong language and
some violence. 1993.

Murder in the Place of Anubis  BR 10186
by Lynda S. Robinson 
2 volumes
Set in ancient Egypt during the reign of fourteen-year-old
Pharaoh Tutankhamun. Meren, young also but mature enough to
serve as counselor to the king, finds it his duty to learn
the truth about a scribe whose body is found in the sacred
Place of Anubis with an embalming knife protruding from the
neck. Meren is torn between loyalty to the king, respect for
the embalming priests, and suspicion of those who would take
advantage of the youthful pharaoh. 1994.

Murder on the Iditarod Trail  BR 10307
by Sue Henry 
2 volumes
Critical injuries are rare during the Iditarod dog-sled
race, but on day two musher George Koptak is found dead.
While Alaska state trooper Alex Jensen investigates the
accident, he learns that another contestant is dead. At a
loss for determining a motive, Jensen turns to musher Jessie
Arnold for help. As other racers die, Alex, who is growing
fond of Jessie, begins to fear for her. Strong language and
violence. For high school and older readers. 1991.

Murder on the Potomac  BR 9715
by Margaret Truman 
2 volumes
When the body of Pauline Juris, secretary to Wendell
Tierney, is found alongside the Potomac River, Tierney seeks
the advice of law professor Mac Smith. Incriminating
evidence in the form of love letters turns up in Pauline's
apartment. It seems that more than one of the Tierneys is
suspect. Meanwhile they all take part in a playacting group
that re-creates old Washington murders. Some strong
language. Bestseller 1994.

Nine Lives to Murder  BR 9683
by Marian Babson 
2 volumes
Leading Shakespearean actor Winstanley Fortescue awakens in
great pain. Was it a heart attack or was he in an accident?
As he cautiously stretches his limbs he gasps in horror to
see paws: he has become the stage cat, Monty! When he learns
that his body (the Instrument) is in the hospital, Win sets
out in Monty's body to learn just what happened. Some strong
language. 1992.

Not Quite Dead Enough: A Nero Wolfe Mystery  BR 9649
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
Archie Goodwin, now a major in the army, has been ordered to
persuade Nero Wolfe to assist the army in solving a crime.
But before he can persuade do so, Archie finds himself
accused of murder. When a corpse refuses to rest in peace,
and Captain Albert Cross of Military Intelligence
"accidentally" falls from his hotel balcony, Nero Wolfe
agrees to get involved. 1942.

Over My Dead Body: A Nero Wolfe Mystery  BR 9651
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
Wise-cracking Archie Goodwin is surprised when his
overweight employer, detective Nero Wolfe, refuses to help
Carla Lovchen's friend, a young Balkan. Carla then convinces
Wolfe to help by proving that her friend (who is accused of
stealing from her fencing student) is Wolfe's long-lost
adopted daughter. Archie is sent to investigate the robbery,
which quickly evolves into murder. Strong language and
violence. 1939.

Please Pass the Guilt: A Nero Wolfe Mystery  BR 9518
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
Dr. Vollmer has asked Nero Wolfe to look into the case of a
man who refuses to give his real name but continually
returns to a psychiatric clinic claiming he keeps washing
his hands because they have blood on them. Is he in any way
connected to the explosion of a bomb in the office of a
potential candidate for the presidency of a large firm? The
bomb killed another man, and no one is certain who the
intended victim was. 1973.

Prisoner's Base: A Nero Wolfe Mystery  BR 9650
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
A young woman has come knocking on Nero Wolfe's door asking
for a place to stay for a week--until June 30. She will not
give her name or explain why she wishes to stay. Shortly
thereafter Perry Helmar, guardian of Priscilla Eads, the
heiress to cotton-towel millions, arrives and asks for
Wolfe's help in finding Priscilla. The next morning
Priscilla and her maid are found strangled. Wolfe
reluctantly agrees to investigate. 1952.

A Question of Guilt  BR 9721
by Frances Fyfield 
2 volumes
The latest object of widowed, unloved Eileen Cartwright's
adoration is her married solicitor. When she convinces
financially desperate part-time P.I. Stanislaus Jaskowski to
kill the solicitor's wife, Jaskowski is quickly caught and
tells all. As prosecutor Helen West and Detective Geoffrey
Bailey build their case against her, Cartwright calmly
concocts a plan for revenge against her new opponents.
Strong language and violence. 1988.

The Return of Mr. Campion  BR 9852
by Margery Allingham 
2 volumes
A collection of mystery stories that feature sleuth Albert
Campion. The author admits that she knows little about her
protagonist other than that Campion is an assumed name for a
man whose business card proclaims, "Coups neatly executed;
nothing sordid, vulgar or plebeian; deserving cases
preferred; police no object." Born in 1900, Campion ages
from story to story until he is in his sixties. Includes a
tribute by Agatha Christie. 1989.

Sacred Ground  BR 9726
by Mercedes Lackey 
3 volumes
Jennifer Talldeer, also known as Kestrel-Hunts-Alone, is an
Osage shaman-in-training as well as a private investigator
in Tulsa, Oklahoma. She is looking into an accident at a
construction site on which an Indian burial ground has been
discovered. As she begins her probe, Jennifer suspects a
conspiracy. She also questions why her grandfather has not
made her a full shaman. Some strong language and some
violence. 1994.

The Secret Adversary  BR 9798
by Agatha Christie 
2 volumes
A pack of shocking love letters, a set of scandalous
memoirs, and the bloody corpse of a famous man turn
Chimneys, a secluded estate where politicians carry on
affairs of state and otherwise, into a place of murder and
menace. A nation's fate hangs on a beautiful woman's guilt
or innocence. 1922.

Send a Fax to the Kasbah  BR 9374
by Dorothy Dunnett 
3 volumes
Executive secretary Wendy Helmann is in Morocco with her
boss Sir Robert after she suggests that he have his
portrait-in-progress completed there while he secretly
attempts to buy out a smaller company. (Wendy's mother is
there because she's involved in every last detail of Wendy's
life.) Almost everyone else in the country appears to have
secret agendas also--from the portrait painter to some Arab
kidnappers. Strong language and some violence. 1991.

The Seventh Sacrament  BR 10133
by James Bradberry 
2 volumes
Wealthy Renzo Piruzzi has invited six famous architects to
his villa to design the new world headquarters for his
Italian firm. They will be advised by Jamie Ramsgill, a
university professor. When the architects arrive, they learn
they will actually be competing to design a chapel. But when
two of the competitors die, Jamie begins to suspect foul
play--and a connection with the seven sacraments. Strong
language. 1994.

The Shaman's Knife  BR 9573
by Scott Young 
3 volumes
After solving Murder in a Cold Climate (BR 8160), Matteesie
Kitologitak, the diminutive Inuit inspector with the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police, has a personal stake in his new
case. While visiting relatives, Kitologitak's ancient,
nomadic mother was struck down by the fleeing murderer of a
young Inuit man and his grandmother. Kitologitak looks to
the young Inuit crowd for a killer with a surprising murder
weapon. Some violence and some strong language. 1993.

The Silent Speaker: A Nero Wolfe Mystery  BR 9654
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
Nero Wolfe, the orchid-growing gourmet detective,
investigates the death of a government official. Archie
Goodwin assists and reveals Wolfe's idiosyncrasies. 1946.

Spark  BR 9625
by John Lutz 
2 volumes
When seventy-year-old Jerome Evans keels over from a heart
attack after getting a clean bill of health, his no-nonsense
wife, Hattie, receives a note claiming Jerome was murdered.
She turns to private investigator Fred Carver, who
immediately stumbles upon the corpse of Jerome's elderly
girlfriend. Carver's continued nosing around the Florida
retirement community makes someone upset enough to
thoroughly work over the disabled PI. Strong language and
violence. 1993.

Split-Levels  BR 10217
by Thomas Rayfiel 
2 volumes
When David Stanley is found dead in the bathtub of his
suburban house, his son Allen returns for the first time in
thirteen years. Allen's mother is dead, and his teenaged
sister disappeared long ago without a trace. Now, as the
investigation shifts from suicide to murder, Allen has
disturbing dreams and becomes a suspect, local women attempt
to seduce him, and nasty rumors circulate about his father.
Strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1994.

Strawgirl  BR 9681
by Abigail Padgett 
2 volumes
Bo Bradley is a San Diego child-abuse investigator who is
struggling with manic depression. She is assigned the case
of Samantha, a three-year-old who dies after hemorrhaging.
The police suspect the mother's live-in anthropologist
boyfriend, Paul, who has taken Samantha's sister and fled.
Although Paul is a member of an unusual group, Bo is uneasy
with the cult motive and searches for another suspect.
Strong language and some violence. 1994.

Suffer Little Children  BR 9959
by Thomas D. Davis 
2 volumes
Two years ago, private investigator Dave Strickland lost his
baby to crib death and his wife to suicide. Now he has been
hired to find Billy, the missing five-year-old son of a
small-town minister. Billy shocked his mother and the
congregation with outbursts of profanity due to Tourette's
syndrome, and his babysitter thinks he was depressed enough
to kill himself. But a ransom note points to kidnapping.
Strong language and some violence. 1991.

Suspended Animation: A Gil Beckman Mystery  BR 10117
by W.E. Davis 
2 volumes
Gil Beckman quit his job with the police force to start a
mail-order business. To make ends meet, Gil works nights as
a security guard at a large California amusement park. When
he discovers that one of the mannequins is actually the body
of young park employee Everett Curran, a Christian like
himself, Gil uses his police training to do some sleuthing.
1994.

Telling Lies: A Maggie MacGowen Mystery  BR 10238
by Wendy Hornsby 
2 volumes
Twenty-two years ago today, investigative filmmaker Maggie
MacGowen's twenty-two-year-old brother, Marc, was killed in
Vietnam, and his twin sister, Emily, was the cover story in
Time magazine because of her antiwar activities. On this
anniversary, Emily, now a well-loved doctor, has summoned
Maggie and others together to meet a "mystery guest" but is
shot before the unveiling. Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. 1992.

To Play the Fool  BR 10220
by Laurie R. King 
2 volumes
Three weeks after the homeless residents of San Francisco's
Golden Gate Park cremated a dog named Theophilus, they
gather wood for the pyre of the dog's master, John. Both
were murdered. Policewoman Kate Martinelli and her partner,
Al Hawkin, intervene. Kate attempts to interview the group's
leader, Brother Erasmus. But he speaks only in quotations,
making her inquiry difficult. Sequel to A Grave Talent (BR
9843). Some strong language. 1995.

Too Many Clients: A Nero Wolfe Mystery  BR 9652
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
When a businessman is murdered, Nero Wolfe is called into
the case by three different people. First he must unravel
the motives behind his clients' requests. 1960.

Tropic of Deceit  BR 9488
by Christopher Larson 
2 volumes
The same day the U.S. consul in Navidad, Jim Biggins,
receives a threat to his life while looking into the
puzzling death of an American tourist, he also receives an
unexpected guest. Vivacious young Bobbi Lyons from Jim's New
York past needs a job and a place to stay. Jim's friend in
the CIA reluctantly hires Bobbi when she wins the admiration
of a key figure in the growing mystery surrounding the
recent death. Strong language and violence. 1993.

Trouble in Triplicate: Nero Wolfe Mysteries  BR 9648
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
Three previously published short novels about detective Nero
Wolfe. In Before I Die, a gangster wants Wolfe to handle a
blackmailer. Help Wanted, Male involves a client who waits
too long to look for help. In Instead of Evidence, a man
predicts his own murder and tells Wolfe who the murderer
will be. 1949.

Tunnel Vision  BR 9826
by Sara Paretsky 
4 volumes
Investigator V.I. Warshawski agrees to find out why
low-income housing planned by a women's trade collective is
blocked. She also worries about a homeless family living in
the basement of her condemned office building. When a
shelter board member is found murdered in V.I.'s office
after offering to help the family, the concerns converge.
Strong language and some violence. Bestseller 1994.

Turtle Baby  BR 10216
by Abigail Padgett 
2 volumes
In this sequel to Strawgirl (BR 9681), child-abuse
investigator Bo Bradley offers to help out her ill,
Spanish-speaking colleague by looking into the case of a
poisoned Mayan infant, Acito. Acito stays with caretakers in
San Diego County, while his mother, a singer called Chac, is
living in Tijuana until her American recording contract
comes through. Chac's love for Acito is fierce, but she's
hiding something. Some strong language. 1995.

Twister  BR 9502
by John Lantigua 
2 volumes
An oil town gone bust, Paradise, Texas, has been all but
taken over by a preacher who can recognize the devil because
he himself has committed every sin except murder. When a
Paradise attorney is attacked by a weapon out of the Bible,
New York magazine writer Edward Thomas decides this is the
story that will end his two-month slump. His investigation
is helped along by a local journalist, a blacklisted
teacher, and a tornado. Some violence. 1992.

A Typical American Town  BR 10219
by John Maddox Roberts 
2 volumes
After being asked to leave the LAPD, Gabe Treloar is heading
to a new job in Cleveland when his latest failed suicide
attempt lands him in his hometown. An old girlfriend
welcomes him back, and he finds a room to rent in his
boyhood home. After his landlady encourages him to unload
the horrors that led to his job change, she is murdered, and
Gabe realizes he is being set up. Strong language, violence,
and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

Wasted Years  BR 9557
by John Harvey 
2 volumes
Midlands Detective Inspector Charlie Resnick broods over a
ten-year-old case that coincided with the breakup of his
marriage. John Prior had been convicted on evidence that had
supposedly come from his wife, Ruth, a singer Resnick
admired. Now Prior is up for parole and a minor player in a
current investigation gives Resnick a chance to reenter the
case. Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions
of sex. 1993.

Occult

Ghosts  BR 9961
by Noel Hynd 
4 volumes
Actress Annette Carlson has moved to Nantucket Island to be
alone. But she is awakened one night by a transparent woman
in white who warns her that everyone on the island is in
danger. Then an evil-looking shape slithers into her cellar.
Detective Brooks, an adamant nonbeliever in ghosts, changes
his mind quickly as he witnesses the cruel actions of
whatever is haunting the island. Strong language, some
violence, and some descriptions of sex. 1993.

The House of Thunder  BR 9778
by Dean R. Koontz 
3 volumes
When Susan Thorton, thirty-two, awakes in a hospital room,
she has no recollection of why she is there. At first all
she remembers is her name and age. Then slowly her memory
returns and she dreams she is lying in a pool of blood in
the House of Thunder. Violence. Bestseller 1982.

Jackals  BR 9989
by Charles Grant 
2 volumes
Traveling to Virginia, Rachel is forced off a hill in
Tennessee by the occupants of an eerie Cadillac. Battered
and terrified, she escapes and crawls to the nearby home of
Jim Scott, who tells her the truth about her pursuers. They
are a band of jackal-like humans who skin and eat their
victims, and Scott has been hunting them for years. Strong
language and violence. 1994.

Psychological Themes

Last Call  BR 9436
by Tim Powers 
5 volumes
Las Vegas's Flamingo Hotel, built by Bugsy Siegel in 1946,
appears to be the manifestation of the Tower in a Tarot card
deck. When it was built, Siegel was the reigning Fisher
King. His power was assumed by Georges Leon, who is now
attempting to assure his own immortality by assuming the
spirit of his son Scott. Now Scott, an alcoholic poker
player, finds himself in mortal combat with his father.
Violence, strong language, and descriptions of sex. 1992.

Out of Body and Mind  BR 9969
by Veronica Jean 
2 volumes
Eve White is in prison for killing her art teacher, Adam
Sault, with a poisoned apple. She explains how the Sandman,
her silent guide since she was seven, instructed her to do
it after Adam was repulsed by Eve's webbed toes. Eve, who
has been in therapy for anxiety attacks and out-of-body
experiences, also tells of her unusual past and the trial
that landed her in prison. Strong language, some violence,
and some descriptions of sex. 1993.

The Trick Is to Keep Breathing  BR 9787
by Janice Galloway 
2 volumes
Drama teacher Joy Stone is going through depression. As her
mouth (which knows more about her than the rest of her put
together) explains to her psychiatrist: her mother died,
Joy's live-in lover shook Joy's hand at the funeral, they
broke up, her married lover moved in, they went on vacation,
and he drowned. Joy's friend tells her just to last until
it's better, but Joy's question is, "What will I do while
I'm lasting?" Strong language. 1989.

The Twenty-Third Dream  BR 9767
by Kathlyn Whitsitt Egbert 
2 volumes
When middle-aged Adam Stauffer is diagnosed with Stage IV
cancer, he and his family try to prepare for his impending
death. After a difficult period when Adam is temporarily put
on a respirator, he convinces his wife to travel with him
and their three children back to his father's Texas ranch.
As Adam explains, slowly dying feels like getting ready to
go back to where you came from. Adam's journal entries
describe his growing acceptance. 1993.

Religious Themes

Heirs of the Motherland: The Russians, Volume 4  BR 9863
by Judith Pella 
3 volumes
Russia, 1890s. War is on the horizon as Count Dmitri Remizov
returns from eighteen years in exile to claim his daughter
Mariana, raised by his wife Katrina's relatives Sergei and
Anna Fedorcenko. The Fedorcenkos and Count Dmitri and
Mariana will have to call upon their faith to sustain them
as they struggle to reunite their families during these
tumultuous times. Sequel to Travail and Triumph (BR 9336).
1993.

The Quilt  BR 9762
by T. Davis Bunn 
1 volume
Mary can hardly remember when she was a little girl, the
years seem to have gone so fast. Now she is old, and she
hopes she has raised her family the way the Lord would have
wanted her to. But something has been keeping her awake at
night, and she finally realizes what it is: she is to make a
quilt, and "not a stitch is to be sewn without a prayer of
thanks." As the quilt-making draws to an end, so does Mary's
life. 1993.

Romance

"Earth Angel"  BR 9748
by Eileen Hehl 
3 volumes
Fifty-three-year-old Kathryn Stuart is shocked when former
high school classmate Jamie Chandler answers an ad for her
fifties' records. Jamie is thrilled to find Kath, who had
dated and married his best friend Gary. Kath refuses to
discuss the past, including Gary, who died in Vietnam. But
Jamie, who is opening a fifties' restaurant, is stuck on the
past and has always loved Kath. Some strong language and
some descriptions of sex. 1993.

Almost Home  BR 9736
by Debra S. Cowan 
2 volumes
Leah Becker, a widow, really loved her husband Robert and
knows she will never love anyone else. But the shipping
business Robert started is in great trouble, and Leah can't
save it alone. She goes to businessman Cabot Montgomery for
assistance and is shocked by the offer he makes. He will
help her if she agrees to marry him and give him the
legitimate heir he wants. But can Leah forget Robert? Some
descriptions of sex. 1994.

Back in Society: The Poor Relation, Volume 6  BR 9966
by Marion Chesney 
2 volumes
The Poor Relation Hotel has become the fashionable place to
stay--especially with the Prince of Wales's coat of arms
over the door. The last thing the proprietors need is a
suicide. But having been thrown out of her home, Lady Jane
Fremney is planning exactly that. Of course the Poor
Relation owners won't let it happen. Sequel to Colonel
Sandhurst to the Rescue (BR 9849). 1994.

Border Music  BR 9879
by Robert James Waller 
2 volumes
Texas Jack Carmine is a wandering man who spends very little
time on his one-horse ranch in Texas. He happens to be in
Dillon, Minnesota, one autumn night in 1986, when a man rips
off Linda Lobo's G-string instead of putting money in it.
Jack attacks the man, and he and Linda run out the back door
and keep on going. Thus begins an odyssey that takes Jack
back into his troubled past. Some strong language and some
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1995.

The Bridges of Madison County  BR 9823
by Robert James Waller 
1 volume
Robert Kincaid, a photographer for National Geographic,
arrives in Madison County, Iowa, on August 16, 1965, to
photograph covered bridges. He stops at the home of
Francesca Johnson to ask directions, but stays for four
wonderful days--days that awaken within them a deep and
abiding love, which creates another being called "us." But
she is married, and they must let go of one another. Some
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1992.

Colonel Sandhurst to the Rescue: The Poor Relation, Volume 5 
BR 9849
by Marion Chesney 
1 volume
The owners of the Poor Relation hotel are in dire straits.
Colonel Sandhurst has been sent to collect an unpaid bill
from Sir Randolph Gray. But instead of returning with money,
he arrives with Miss Frederica Gray, who is running away
from home to avoid a forced marriage to the elderly Lord
Peter Bewley. As is typical at the Poor Relation, romance
takes over and all works out for the best. Sequel to Sir
Philip's Folly (BR 9567). 1994.

Crimson Roses  BR 9682
by Grace Livingston Hill 
2 volumes
Marion Warren is rather put upon in the family home now that
her brother's wife seems to have taken over. But Marion is
strong enough to find a place of her own, and with the
meagre earnings from her first job, she purchases a season
ticket to the symphony. At the second concert, a rose
appears on her seat, and then it happens at every concert.
Delighted, Marion learns that the sender is Lyman, a wealthy
young man who quickly makes his intentions known. 1928.

Doctor Zhivago  BR 9814
by Boris Pasternak 
5 volumes
The story of a Russian physician and poet during the early
decades of the twentieth century. Yurii Zhivago, an
individualist and something of an outsider, is separated
from his wife by the Bolsheviks and falls in love with Lara,
the wife of another man. Pasternak's portrait of Russian
life during the post-revolution years includes an epilogue
expressing hope for liberation and freedom in the future.
1958.

Electricity: A Novel  BR 10353
by Victoria Glendinning 
2 volumes
In Victorian England, the change of mores that broadens
women's roles and the coming of technology that alters daily
life are reflected in the notebooks of a young woman. Raised
in a repressive household, Charlotte Mortimer becomes
enamored of a young engineer who introduces electricity with
a missionary zeal. Her infatuation pales after marriage,
though, and she enters into a dangerous new liaison. 1995.

Five Days in Paris  BR 10234
by Danielle Steel 
2 volumes
Peter Haskell, president of a major pharmaceutical company,
is in Paris awaiting test results on a drug that could
revolutionize cancer care. Olivia Thatcher, who lost her son
to cancer, is also in Paris. While Peter's family means
everything to him, Olivia feels she no longer knows her
husband, a renowned United States senator. One night Peter
and Olivia meet, and their lives are changed forever. Some
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1995.

Forever Victoria  BR 9486
by Dorothy Garlock 
2 volumes
After her father dies, Victoria McKenna is shocked to learn
that her English half brother has sold the ranch that was
left to her. When the buyer, Mason Mahaffey, arrives with
his brood of younger siblings, Victoria is forced to share
the ranch with them until legal ownership is proven. When
Victoria is stalked by an unknown person, her feelings about
Mason take an unexpected turn. Strong language, violence,
and explicit descriptions of sex. 1983.

Halfway to Paradise  BR 9772
by Emily Bradshaw 
3 volumes
Royalist Matthew Hawkins, earl of Chester, is stripped of
his title and thrown in prison for treason. Puritan widow
Jane Alexander learns Hawkins's servants are trying to find
a home for his young son Gideon. Against Hawkins's strong
objections, the childless woman takes Gideon in. But Hawkins
escapes, becomes a successful underworld thief, and plots to
retrieve his son and leave England. Strong language,
violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1993.

The Hellion  BR 9807
by LaVyrle Spencer 
2 volumes
Tommy Lee Gentry is known as a hell-raiser in his hometown
of Russellville, Alabama. He has been married three times,
drives fast cars, drinks, and almost always has a woman with
him. He has never been happy, but there is a chance for
things to change. Rachel, his childhood sweetheart, is free
again. Descriptions of sex. 1984.

Keeper of the Heart  BR 9471
by Johanna Lindsey 
3 volumes
The future on planet Kystran. Shanelle Ly-San-Ter has
completed her education and must now select a lifemate.
Unlike many of her friends, she has not shared sex with
anyone--her father provides a companion to make sure she
waits for her lifemate. But when she meets Falon Van'yer,
she throws caution to the wind. Has she made a big mistake?
Some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1993.

The Legacy  BR 9782
by Linda Lael Miller 
3 volumes
Jacy Tiernan returns to South Australia when her father,
Jake, has a heart attack. Ian Yarbro is not happy to see
her: ten years ago Jacy broke Ian's heart by fleeing to
America when his ex-lover announced she was pregnant by him.
Now Jake wants Jacy and Ian to marry and take over his land.
But their lust for each other may not be enough to sustain a
marriage. Strong language, explicit descriptions of sex, and
some violence. Bestseller 1994.

Love at the Ritz  BR 9629
by Barbara Cartland 
1 volume
Lady Vilma Dale is in Paris with her father, the earl of
Cuttesdale, who has come to obtain treatment for a back
injury received while breaking in a horse. They are passing
as Colonel Crawshaw and his daughter to avoid recognition.
But when Vilma ends up at the new Ritz Hotel and is mistaken
for a maid by both a French count and an English marquis,
she is in for some surprises. 1993.

The Morning Gift  BR 9577
by Eva Ibbotson 
3 volumes
Ruth Berger, separated from her family during the early days
of World War II, marries longtime English family friend,
Quinton Somerville, in order to get out of Vienna. They plan
to annul the marriage upon arrival in England so Ruth may
marry Cousin Heini, a musician from Budapest. But the
situation becomes complicated when Ruth and Quinton finally
consummate their marriage and he gives her a gift the next
morning. 1993.

Noblesse Oblige  BR 10107
by Helen Argers 
3 volumes
Caroline Richmond has only one chance at a London season,
and it appears she will be successful. Caroline has captured
the attention of one of London's most eligible bachelors,
Branville, the marquis of Kimston. But as the season draws
to an end, the marquis has not offered for her, and Caroline
returns home in disgrace. Then her father arranges for her
to marry the marquis's father. 1994.

Private Scandals  BR 9668
by Nora Roberts 
4 volumes
Chicago, 1994. It is midnight when Deanna Reynolds arrives
at the CBC TV station, where Angela Perkins has demanded to
meet her. They have become enemies in the past few years as
Deanna has usurped Angela's place in the talk-show market
and in Finn Riley's life. Now Deanna hopes to have it out
with Angela. But when Deanna walks into the studio, she
discovers Angela with her face blown away. Strong language
and explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1993.

Promise Me Anything  BR 9802
by Meryl Sawyer 
4 volumes
When his uncle dies, Alex Savich inherits the failing
British diamond company that his uncle sank all of their
savings into. As Alex tries to save the firm by sneaking
diamonds smuggled by his uncle onto the market, he fights a
wild attraction to jewelry designer Brett Lamont. Just as
their relationship begins, Brett's missing lover returns and
Alex is caught up in Russian political intrigue. Strong
language and explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

A Season of Angels  BR 9582
by Debbie Macomber 
3 volumes
It is almost Christmas, and Gabriel, short on angels to
answer prayers, must rely upon angels Shirley, Goodness, and
Mercy, who have made serious mistakes in the past. Leah,
married ten years, desperately wants a child. Monica wants a
husband, but her lack of faith stands in the way. And Jody
must get over the death of her husband and find a new father
for her son. Some strong language and some descriptions of
sex. Bestseller 1993.

The Silent Suitor  BR 9896
by Elisabeth Fairchild 
2 volumes
Miss Sarah Wilkes Lyndle's mother died from a feverish
malaise when Sarah was still quite young. That same fever
took away Sarah's sight. Now, at twenty-four, Sarah has left
her sheltered country life behind and come to London for the
first time. Lady Castleford, who happens to have a son known
as the "Beast" and a handsome nephew known as "Beauty," has
agreed to introduce Sarah at Almack's. 1994.

Sir Philip's Folly: The Poor Relation, Volume 4  BR 9567
by Marion Chesney 
1 volume
The Poor Relation is burdened with an undesirable guest
brought in by Sir Philip Sommerville. Mrs. Budge, a vulgar,
overweight woman, has stolen Sir Philip's heart away from
Miss Tonks. Other guests include Lady Carruthers, who
refuses to act her age, and her daughter Arabella, who is in
love with the Earl of Denby but stands little chance of
capturing him because of her mother. Sequel to Mrs. Budley
Falls from Grace (BR 9387). 1993.

Slow Waltz in Cedar Bend  BR 9824
by Robert James Waller 
2 volumes
Michael Tillman is a middle-aged college economics professor
in Cedar Bend. He first meets Jellie Braden, forty, during a
reception at the dean's home. They are immediately attracted
to each other, but she is married and Michael does have some
scruples. When Jellie unexpectedly returns to India, Michael
follows, and learns of a secret that haunts Jellie. Some
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1993.

Tarnished Hearts  BR 9803
by Raine Cantrell 
1 volume
Trevor Shelby's youthful dream of being a doctor was
literally beaten out of him by his father. Then he was sent
to boarding school. But war is now imminent in the South,
and Trevor, twenty-six, has been called home to Georgia. He
is back only a few days when he meets Leah Reese, the
daughter of his friend's overseer. But their desire for each
other is forbidden by their class differences. Violence,
descriptions of sex, and some strong language. 1994.

Temptation's Trail  BR 9794
by Dana Ransom 
3 volumes
Seventeen-year-old Amanda Duncan has come to Texas to find
her brother, a courier who disappeared with some jewels. A
wealthy orphan, Amanda is able to hire the tracker she has
read about in dime westerns: Harmon Bass. But Bass is not
what she expected. He is small and wiry, one-quarter Apache,
and obsessed with a nightmare from his past. And Amanda
falls in love with him. Strong language, violence, and
explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

Thunder and Roses  BR 9618
by Mary Jo Putney 
3 volumes
Nicholas Davies, raised by Gypsies until he was seven, is
known in the Welsh village of Penreith as the Demon Earl.
Clare Morgan, the schoolmistress and vicar's daughter, has
called on Nicholas for help in improving conditions at the
local mine. She is so desperate that she agrees to live with
Nicholas for three months. But she quickly finds herself in
unexplored territory. Some strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 1993.

Thwonk  BR 10227
by Joan Bauer 
2 volumes
High school senior A.J. McCreary has a lot of problems.
After four failed relationships, she now has a crush on
unattainable Peter Terris, her father forbids her to pursue
a career as a photographer, and she is running out of time
to take a perfect photo for the Valentine issue of the
school paper. Then A.J. receives a visit from a tiny,
irritating cupid complete with arrows that go "thwonk." For
junior and senior high and older readers. 1995.

A Time for Love  BR 9894
by Constance O'Day-Flannery 
3 volumes
In the dentist's chair with her mind clouded by laughing
gas, businesswoman Elle Mackenzie is suddenly transported
back to 1876. She is mistaken for Jordan McCabe's mail-order
bride and taken to his Texas ranch. Other twists of fate
find her actually married to Jordan, and mother of two
orphaned children. But fear of returning to the 1990s
threatens her happiness. Some violence, some strong
language, and some descriptions of sex. 1991.

To Love and to Cherish  BR 9493
by Sarah G. Joseph 
2 volumes
Texas secretary Candace scolds herself for daydreaming about
Nick, a New Yorker she met two months ago at a friend's
wedding. She is angry that she allowed herself to be seduced
by such a playboy. If only her steady beau, Don, would show
some signs of romance, Candace would be happy to marry him.
But it's Nick who surprises her with flowers on her birthday
and the news that he has moved to Texas. And he refuses to
believe that Candace couldn't care less! 1991.

Uncertain Magic  BR 9713
by Laura Kinsale 
3 volumes
In the eighteenth century, Roderica Delamore is cursed with
the family's psychic gift. Her fear that she will never
marry or lead a normal life is lifted when she meets the
infamous Faelan Iveragh and cannot penetrate his mysterious
mind. Faelan is puzzled by Roderica's offer of marriage but
accepts--much to the dismay of Roderica's family. Is Faelan
as wicked as his reputation? Strong language, explicit
descriptions of sex, and some violence. 1987.

Uncommon Vows  BR 9483
by Mary Jo Putney 
3 volumes
In twelfth-century England, there are two warring earls of
Shropshire--one appointed by the king and one by the ousted
Matilda. Because Meriel de Vere lives with her brother, a
knight loyal to the king, she lies when she encounters
Matilda's earl, Adrian. Taken by her, Adrian holds Meriel
prisoner, hoping she will grow to love him. Instead she
tries to kill herself, only to awaken without a memory.
Violence and explicit descriptions of sex. 1991.

Wings  BR 10092
by Danielle Steel 
3 volumes
As a child, Cassie O'Malley knows that she wants to be a
pilot like her father. He refuses to instruct her, so she
gets family friend and ace pilot Nick Galvin to give her
lessons. Cassie becomes an outstanding pilot who enjoys
participating in air shows. Desmond Williams sees her at one
and offers her a job. Cassie accepts and becomes involved in
an adventure bigger than she dreamed of. Some strong
language and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1994.

You Belong to Me  BR 10169
by Johanna Lindsey 
2 volumes
Sequel to Once a Princess (BR 8620). Count Vasili Petroff is
surprised to learn that he, like his cousin, Stefan Barony,
has been betrothed to someone. Supposedly Vasili's father,
dead for fourteen years, made a secret agreement with Baron
Constantin Rubliov for their children to marry. Both the
count and the blunt, unconventional Alexandra are appalled.
Strong language and explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller
1994.

Science Fiction

The Aliens of Earth  BR 10298
by Nancy Kress 
3 volumes
Eighteen science fiction and fantasy stories by the Nebula
and Hugo Award-winning author. The collection includes "The
Price of Oranges," a time travel story; "In a World like
This," a tale that presents a nightmarish erosion of
reality; and "The Battle of Long Island," about an alternate
universe. "People like Us" and "Cannibals" are about aliens.
Some strong language. 1993.

Barrayar  BR 9534
by Lois McMaster Bujold 
3 volumes
Cordelia Naismith, former commander with the Beta
Expeditionary Force, is now the wife of Lord Aral Vorkosigan
of the planet Barrayar. When her husband becomes regent, her
quiet life as a devoted wife and expectant mother is
threatened by a bloody civil war--a conflict that will have
far-reaching effects on her adopted world and on the life of
her unborn son. Winner of the 1992 Hugo award. 1991.

Burning Bright  BR 9744
by Melissa Scott 
3 volumes
Starpilot Quinn Lioe needs to have some work done on her
starship at the planet Burning Bright. She plans to take the
opportunity to play a game of virtual reality also. But
Quinn finds herself becoming a pawn in a power struggle
between two empires--the human and the hsai. Some strong
language and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1993.

Champions of the Force: The Jedi Academy Trilogy, Volume 3 
BR 10104
by Kevin J. Anderson 
2 volumes
The heroes of the New Republic continue their struggle
against the evil Empire. Princess Leia strives to protect
her children from imperial agents, Han Solo undertakes a
mission to track down a rogue Jedi knight and persuade him
to return to the good side of the Force, and Luke Skywalker
lies comatose fighting for his survival on the spirit plane.
A Star Wars novel. Sequel to Dark Apprentice (BR 9872).
Bestseller 1994.

Children of the Jedi  BR 10185
by Barbara Hambly 
3 volumes
After an old friend tries to murder Han Solo on the jungle
world of Ithor, Luke Skywalker sets out for a distant star
system to learn the reason for the assassination attempt.
Meanwhile Han Solo and Princess Leia investigate the rumor
of a lost enclave of Jedi children on the isolated world of
Belsavis and come up against an old evil from the days of
the Empire. A Star Wars novel. Bestseller 1995.

The City Who Fought  BR 9865
by Anne McCaffrey and S.M. Stirling 
4 volumes
Shellperson Simeon controls the vast, city-sized space
station SSS-900. Bored with the daily mining and processing
operations, Simeon indulges his passion for war games. When
refugees arrive fleeing Kolnari space pirates, Simeon knows
that the station's only chance for survival is a real-life
application of his war game skills. Strong language,
violence, and some descriptions of sex. 1993.

The Courtship of Princess Leia  BR 9716
by Dave Wolverton 
3 volumes
Princess Leia of the New Republic considers marrying Prince
Isolder of the Hapes Consortium in order to form a military
alliance against the Empire. Han Solo, shocked to learn he
now has a rival for the hand of Princess Leia, takes a last,
desperate gamble to win her back. His ploy brings Leia,
followed by Luke Skywalker and Prince Isolder, to the
untamed planet Dathomir, where new dangers await. A Star
Wars novel. 1994.

The Crystal Star  BR 10187
by Vonda N. McIntyre 
3 volumes
While Princess Leia attempts to rescue her kidnapped
children from a power-mad Empire loyalist, Luke Skywalker
and Han Solo investigate a space-bending crystalline star
that causes a disruption in the Force and adversely affects
Luke's Jedi powers. And on a nearby planet, Luke and Han
meet a charismatic alien with miraculous healing powers, but
whose intentions are unclear. A Star Wars novel. 1994.

Dark Apprentice: The Jedi Academy Trilogy, Volume 2  BR 9872
by Kevin J. Anderson 
3 volumes
Despite their past victories, Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, and
Princess Leia are faced with increasing losses in the
ongoing war with scattered remnants of the Empire. Luke
knows that lasting peace can be achieved only through the
creation of a new generation of Jedi knights, but when one
of his students delves into the dark side of the Force, the
greatest evil of all is unleashed. Bestseller 1994.

Dark Mirror  BR 9730
by Diane Duane 
3 volumes
When the Enterprise is drawn into a parallel universe,
Captain Picard and his colleagues come face to face with an
alternate Enterprise manned by persons identical to
themselves. This universe turns out to be a place where
humanity has gone awry, with rule by terror and brutality.
And the evil counterparts of Picard and his crew are bent on
capturing the Enterprise for sinister purposes. A Star Trek:
The Next Generation novel. Bestseller 1993.

Debtors' Planet  BR 9714
by W.R. Thompson 
2 volumes
When the unscrupulous Ferengi contract to bring advanced
technology to a primitive world, it can only mean trouble.
Captain Jean-Luc Picard and the crew of the starship
Enterprise are sent to investigate. Aboard the Enterprise is
a twentieth-century businessman, retrieved from cryonic
suspension, who may be able to apply his own ruthless
talents to thwart the plans of the Ferengi. A Star Trek, the
Next Generation novel. 1994.

Firehand  BR 9965
by Andre Norton and P.M. Griffin 
2 volumes
The Dominion of Virgin has been destroyed by the Baldies--a
band of time-traveling predators who wipe out any race they
encounter. Ross Murdock, Eveleen Riordan, and Gordon Ashe
are time agents for the Project, whose goal is to rescue
Dominion by going back to an earlier time and providing the
residents with the mental powers needed to avoid the
Baldies' attack. For high school and older readers. 1994.

The Great Starship Race  BR 9424
by Diane Carey 
2 volumes
A newly discovered alien people is eager to join the
Federation of planets, and they sponsor a starship race to
promote their membership. The U.S.S. Enterprise, under the
command of Captain Kirk, is sent to compete. But the
good-natured contest turns ominous when a Romulan warship
shows up and enters the race with an unknown motive. A Star
Trek novel. Bestseller 1993.

Ice Trap  BR 9519
by L.A. Graf 
2 volumes
While searching for a missing team of scientists, Captain
Kirk and the senior officers of the U.S.S. Enterprise become
trapped on the ice-covered world of Nordstral. Unable to
communicate with the Enterprise and at the mercy of
earthquakes and magnetic storms, Kirk and his companions
know they must unlock the secret of this mysterious world of
ice or face certain death. A Star Trek novel. 1992.

Interface  BR 10349
by Stephen Bury 
5 volumes
William Cozzano is the perfect presidential candidate. An
international network to whom the United States owes most of
the national debt has taken him over, literally, with a
microchip in his brain. The network can instantaneously feed
the latest public opinions, obtained from the populace by
wrist-worn polling units, directly into Cozzano. He's
unbeatable--if nothing goes wrong! Strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 1994.

Jedi Search: The Jedi Academy Trilogy, Volume 1  BR 9768
by Kevin J. Anderson 
3 volumes
In the wake of the Republic's victory over the evil Empire,
Luke Skywalker wants to reinstate the order of Jedi knights.
He begins a precarious mission to find descendants of the
nearly exterminated Jedis. Meanwhile, Han Solo and Chewbacca
discover a remnant base of the Empire under the command of a
ruthless woman who has at her disposal a weapon more
destructive than the Empire's death stars. A Star Wars
novel. Bestseller 1994.

Jumper  BR 9548
by Steven Gould 
3 volumes
After twice ending up in his local library following
threatening situations, Davy Rice, seventeen, realizes he
has the ability to "jump," or teleport himself. He also
believes his mother had the same power and that she used it
to escape from Davy's abusive father. Soon Davy finds
himself on the streets of New York where he uses teleporting
for survival and to find his mom. Strong language and some
violence. For junior and senior high and older readers.
1992.

Keeper of the Heart  BR 9471
by Johanna Lindsey 
3 volumes
The future on planet Kystran. Shanelle Ly-San-Ter has
completed her education and must now select a lifemate.
Unlike many of her friends, she has not shared sex with
anyone--her father provides a companion to make sure she
waits for her lifemate. But when she meets Falon Van'yer,
she throws caution to the wind. Has she made a big mistake?
Some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1993.

The Man in the High Castle  BR 9889
by Philip K. Dick 
2 volumes
This 1963 Hugo Award winner portrays an alternate history.
The Axis powers have won World War II and jointly occupy the
United States. A German faction attempts to warn the
Japanese about an impending nuclear attack. The I Ching is
used not only in the plotting of this story, but also within
the story as the basis of a "subversive" alternate history
written by a German author. Some strong language. 1962.

Mysterium  BR 10290
by Robert Charles Wilson 
2 volumes
Two Rivers, Michigan, is the site of a government facility
that is conducting tests on a strange artifact found in
Turkey in 1989. Then in the early dawn hours of a Saturday
in late May, the town vanishes. The residents awake to find
themselves in a town without modern technology and governed
by a powerful, repressive church. Some violence. 1994.

Q-Squared  BR 9867
by Peter David 
3 volumes
Trelane, the pesky, omnipotent being who first appeared as
the Squire of Gothos to Captain Kirk of the original
Enterprise, is back to plague Captain Picard and the
next-generation crew. This time Trelane threatens all of
creation by tampering with three different timelines, and
even the all-powerful Q is unable to stop him. A Star Trek:
The Next Generation novel. Some strong language. 1994.

Redline the Stars  BR 9795
by Andre Norton and P.M. Griffin 
2 volumes
Captain Jellico and the crew of the Solar Queen are
concerned about finding a buyer for part of their fleet--the
Space Wrack. They can't keep using it for mail runs. A new
temporary crew member trades passage to Canuche of Halio for
her brother's purchase of the Space Wrack. But what was to
be a simple trip soon turns dangerous. Some strong language.
1993.

Sarek  BR 9662
by A.C. Crispin 
4 volumes
Ambassador Sarek of Vulcan learns of a treacherous plot to
destroy the Federation of Planets, and he must bring all his
logic and diplomatic skill to bear to unmask and foil the
villains. But his efforts are complicated by the impending
death of his beloved wife, Amanda, and the arrival of his
estranged son, Spock, first officer of the starship
Enterprise. A Star Trek novel. 1994.

Shadows on the Sun  BR 9497
by Michael Jan Friedman 
3 volumes
The crew of the USS Enterprise is on the way back to
Earth--and retirement. Plans change when they are asked to
go on one last mission. Civil war brews on the planet Ssan,
where a group of assassins seeks power. McCoy has had some
experience in dealing with the cult, and it is hoped he can
help. But he doesn't count on his ex-wife, the only woman he
ever loved, being among the mediators. A Star Trek novel.
Strong language and some violence. 1993.

Star Trek Generations  BR 9953
by J.M. Dillard 
2 volumes
On the maiden voyage of the new Enterprise 1701-B, Captain
Kirk is trapped in a timeless nexus when an energy ribbon
hits the ship. Seventy-eight years later, Captain Picard of
the Enterprise 1701-D is also propelled into the nexus while
pursuing an evil scientist. Inside the nexus, Kirk and
Picard meet and team up to stop the scientist from killing
millions of people. A Star Trek novel based on the motion
picture. Bestseller 1994.

The Starship Trap  BR 9523
by Mel Gilden 
2 volumes
Spaceships from nearly every known race of the galaxy are
disappearing. Klingon warships, Romulan Birds of Prey, and
even Federation starships have vanished without a clue. All
the races are distrustful of each other and ready to blame
their traditional enemies for the disappearances. Captain
Kirk of the USS Enterprise must solve the mystery of the
missing ships or watch as the galaxy disintegrates in a
deadly war. A Star Trek novel. 1993.

The War of the Worlds  BR 9590
by H.G. Wells 
2 volumes
The Martians, a loathsome though highly organized race,
invade England and, with their superior weapons, subdue and
prey on the people. For high school and adult readers. 1898.

Windows on a Lost World  BR 9580
by V.E. Mitchell 
2 volumes
While on an archaeological survey of an uninhabited planet,
Captain Kirk and the crew of the starship Enterprise
discover an odd artifact that looks like a window into
another world. When Kirk steps through the window, he finds
himself trapped in the body of a strange, crab-like alien,
and even the astute Mr. Spock is at a loss to understand
what happened to his friend and how to rescue him. A Star
Trek novel. 1993.


Short Stories

Across the Bridge: Stories  BR 9512
by Mavis Gallant 
2 volumes
In this collection of eleven short stories, the first four
deal with the lives of the Carette family--Berthe, her
sister Marie, and their mother. Berthe, somewhat
unconventional for her time, is unmarried but sleeps with a
married man. Marie is a helpless but demanding wife. In the
title story, a mother throws her daughter's wedding
invitations into the water. And in "The Fenton Child," a
young girl learns how to handle her father. 1993.

American Eyes: New Asian-American Short Stories for Young
Adults  BR 10180
edited by Lori M. Carlson 
1 volume
Ten coming-of-age stories about the conflict many Asian
American youths experience when they examine their native
Korean, Japanese, Chinese, Vietnamese, and Filipino
heritages with American eyes. Sometimes it is a search for
identity, sometimes it is cultural embarrassment, and
sometimes it is a generation gap, but in each story
something ignites an Asian fire. For junior and senior high
readers. 1994.

Barking Man and Other Stories  BR 10123
by Madison Smartt Bell 
2 volumes
A collection of ten short stories showing the struggles of
people and other creatures on the fringes of society. A
Chinese laboratory mouse uses the I Ching for predicting the
future, and the hero of the title story not only barks, but
sheds, climbs on the furniture, and bites. 1990.

A Brief History of Male Nudes in America  BR 9781
by Dianne Nelson 
1 volume
In the title story, the seventeen-year-old protagonist
observes her mother's parade of lovers. As she explains,
"There is a way to stare politely. . . . I think it's fair
to say I'm an expert with my eyes." In "Ground Rules," a man
and his son swoop into the ex-wife's yard to kidnap the
younger son she took with her. Other entries in this
recipient of the Flannery O'Connor Award capture fleeting,
poignant moments. Some strong language. 1993.

Carry On, Jeeves  BR 9533
by P.G. Wodehouse 
1 volume
Ten stories about the adventures of the irresponsible Bertie
Wooster and his indispensable valet, Jeeves. Bertie recalls
the morning he hired Jeeves on the spot, thanks to Jeeves's
ability to produce a hangover cure. The incomparable valet
proves himself time and again as he copes with uninvited
houseguests, patches up broken romances, and listens
politely to Bertie's harebrained schemes. 1925.

A Christmas Sampler: Classic Stories of the Season, from
Twain to Cheever   BR 9430
edited by E.A. Crawford and Teresa Kennedy 
3 volumes
American authors reinforce the notion that Christmas brings
mixed emotions. "Christmas Thoughts" evokes the festivity of
the season and "Christmas Is a Sad Season for the Poor" puts
a new slant on the joy of giving gifts. "One Christmas Eve"
brings out mean-spiritedness toward a black child and "Oh,
Joseph, I'm So Tired" introduces anti-Semitism. 1992.

Doctors and Other Casualties  BR 9617
by Stewart Massad 
3 volumes
Like himself, most of Massad's protagonists are
obstetricians or gynecologists--some green in the art of
"catching babies," others aging and cynical. Many are
practicing in southern clinics, their patients poor and
often ignorant about their pregnancies. In "Dreams of a
Doctor's Wife," the wife of a busy young obstetrician
ironically feels abandoned during her own pregnancy. Strong
language and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1993.

Fine Feathers and Other Stories  BR 9866
by E.F. Benson 
3 volumes
Stories from a literary career that began in the late
nineteenth century. In the title story, a couple inherits a
small fortune and takes up residence in a fine house. But,
not being to the manor born, they miss the small-town gossip
and activity and in the end return to their humble home. The
author joins this tale with others dealing with social
comeuppance, comedy, sarcasm, crooks, cranks, and spooks.
1994.

The Flight of Andy Burns: Stories  BR 9670
by Alice Mattison 
2 volumes
In "The Library Card," a woman realizes it was a terrible
mistake to marry her husband, who isn't perfect. "She will
have to pound him with her words and tears so many more
times before she fixes him, so many hundreds of times."
Mattison's other protagonists also experience profound
realizations during the course of their ordinary days. Some
strong language. 1993.

Good Bones and Simple Murders  BR 10119
by Margaret Atwood 
1 volume
Three dozen sketches that grin and sneer at taking life too
seriously. "Good Bones" muses on the attention paid to the
skeletal frame when it is what makes bones "bad" that is of
interest. In "Gertrude Talks Back," Hamlet's mother delivers
a monologue to her priggish son. And "Let Us Now Praise
Stupid Women" is one of several pieces with a feminist view
on the role of women in literature. Some strong language.
1994.

Happiness  BR 9615
by Ann Harleman 
2 volumes
In the title story of this winner of the John Simmons Short
Fiction Award, the protagonist, a philosophy teacher by
night and a greeting card writer by day, is annoyed by his
students' clich‚s and his newly found half-brother's simple
dreams. In "Humdrum," as a woman toys with the idea of
leaving her boring husband, he tracks down his long-lost
mother who left his father because life was humdrum. Some
strong language and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

Heart Songs and Other Stories  BR 10249
by E. Annie Proulx 
2 volumes
Eleven short stories featuring the rites of nature and the
rituals of small-town life in rural New England. Proulx's
focus includes the blue-collar worker who is affected by the
newly rural bourgeoisie; the natives who enjoy hunting and
fishing; and the malice, greed, and passion that affect the
residents. Strong language and some violence. 1995.

In the Land of Men: Stories  BR 9446
by Antonya Nelson 
2 volumes
In the collection's title story, the brothers of a recently
raped waitress bring her the perpetrator in the trunk of the
family car. In "Adobe," a divorc‚e is intrigued with the
homeless Chicano who is building her house, while in "The
Facts of Air," a recently separated woman's days revolve
around a sick cat and the veterinarian. "Fort Despair"
describes a family trip in which the mother runs off with
her lover. Strong language and explicit descriptions of sex.
1992.

In the Sparrow Hills: Stories  BR 10252
by Emile Capouya 
2 volumes
Five autobiographical tales. Most draw on the author's
experiences, often having to do with life at sea and
occasionally with literary associations. In the title story,
the narrator searches in vain for a Chekhov tale he read in
college. 1993.

A Literary Christmas: Great Contemporary Christmas Stories 
BR 9703
edited by Lilly Golden 
3 volumes
In one story, a poor child's last thread of hope snaps.
Another tale reveals the tension that builds up when some
families gather. The ubiquitous Christmas play includes a
part for a small girl with a big voice, who happens to be
Jewish. In all, twenty-seven stories explore the spirit of
Christmas and what it means in cultural, psychological,
secular, religious, and emotional terms. Some strong
language. 1992.

The Nature of Longing  BR 10293
by Alyce Miller 
2 volumes
Collection of eight short stories, most dealing with the
complexity of race relations. In the title story about a
homosexual librarian, race is less an issue than sexuality.
In "Color Struck," a black mother has difficulty accepting
her albino daughter. In "What Jasmine Would Think," a white
teenage girl tries to hang out with a group of black teens,
and in "Off-Season Travel," two couples develop an
unsettling bond. Some strong language. 1994.

Once upon a More Enlightened Time: More Politically Correct
Bedtime Stories  BR 10132
by James Finn Garner 
1 volume
In the sequel to Politically Correct Bedtime Stories (BR
9870), Garner once more provides fairytales without biases.
Hansel and Gretal become ecoheroes who turn their tree-
butcher father into a beaver. In "The Little Mer-Persun,"
the air breather sacrifices his peopleness and becomes half
prawn to be with his mer-person underwater. Bestseller 1995.

The Palace Thief  BR 9819
by Ethan Canin 
2 volumes
The title story tells of the conflict between a history
teacher in a private boys' school and one of his students.
The "dullard" son of a senator, Sedgewick Bell cheats at an
oral exam, only to be foiled by a trick question. Years
later, Bell demands another chance. In other selections, men
reflect on the past, one character wondering why, "of all
the lives that might have been mine, I have led the one I
have just described." Some strong language. 1994.

The Piano Tuner: Stories  BR 10202
by Peter Meinke 
2 volumes
The stories in this collection are a mixture of surprises in
both familiar surroundings and in foreign, but predictable,
circumstances. In the title story, an ignorant bully holds
an educated man hostage in his own home. And in "The Twisted
River," an American professor on leave attempts to sabotage
the careers of two Polish university faculty members. Some
strong language. Winner of the Flannery O'Connor Award for
Short Fiction. 1986.

The Return of Mr. Campion  BR 9852
by Margery Allingham 
2 volumes
A collection of mystery stories that feature sleuth Albert
Campion. The author admits that she knows little about her
protagonist other than that Campion is an assumed name for a
man whose business card proclaims, "Coups neatly executed;
nothing sordid, vulgar or plebeian; deserving cases
preferred; police no object." Born in 1900, Campion ages
from story to story until he is in his sixties. Includes a
tribute by Agatha Christie. 1989.

The Return of Simple  BR 10110
by Langston Hughes 
2 volumes
Stories featuring the fictional character Jesse B. Semple,
or Simple, drawn from Hughes's previous collections of
newspaper columns and from his weekly column in the Chicago
Defender. Perched on his Harlem barstool, Simple muses with
Boyd, his longtime companion, on topics including the women
in his life, wages and prices, racism, politics, birth
control, Africa, and black pride. 1994.

A Stranger in This World  BR 10078
by Kevin Canty 
2 volumes
Ten stories, set in the South or the West, each dealing with
an unfortunate situation or a destructive person. The first
story depicts the agony of a teenaged boy who attempts to
care for alcoholic parents but wonders about his own needs.
And in the title story, a young woman imagines that she sees
her dead husband when she meets the brother of her
boyfriend. Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1994.

Stripping and Other Stories  BR 9841
by Pagan Kennedy 
1 volume
In the title story, retired school teacher Nan decides to
discuss with her cousin Henry the day he watched his older
brother rape her. In "Shrinks," Sara's mother congratulates
her for having consulted thirty therapists in as many years.
"It shows how serious you are about solving your problems."
A shy girl in "Camp" meets an even shyer boy and lets him
believe she is popular. Strong language, some violence, and
some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

Trouble in Triplicate: Nero Wolfe Mysteries  BR 9648
by Rex Stout 
2 volumes
Three previously published short novels about detective Nero
Wolfe. In Before I Die, a gangster wants Wolfe to handle a
blackmailer. Help Wanted, Male involves a client who waits
too long to look for help. In Instead of Evidence, a man
predicts his own murder and tells Wolfe who the murderer
will be. 1949.

The Wedding Dress: Stories from the Dakota Plains  BR 9634
by Carrie Young 
1 volume
In the title story, Ildri, a seamstress of Norwegian
descent, is asked to model an intricately made wedding
dress. Upon leaving her position, Ildri buys the dress and
lends it to a succession of brides in her homesteading
community before finding her own bittersweet use for it. The
collection's other stories are also peopled with Norwegian
Americans on the Dakota Plains. Some strong language. 1992.

Suspense

Acceptable Risk  BR 9881
by Robin Cook 
3 volumes
In 1692, Elizabeth Stewart is hung as a witch in Salem after
a young girl in her care experiences hallucinations. Now,
300 years later, Elizabeth's descendant Kim Stewart, who
inherited Elizabeth's house, is dating a scientist who
suspects a mold on Elizabeth's rye caused the problem. His
search leads to the discovery of a possible antidepressant,
but his odd behavior is scaring Kim. Violence and some
strong language. Bestseller 1994.

Assumed Identity  BR 9484
by David Morrell 
5 volumes
Experts in Mayan hieroglyphics start dying off. Brendan
Buchanan, deep-cover U.S. operative, changes chameleon-like
from one identity to another until his cover is blown in
Mexico. An acquaintance of a previous Buchanan alias is on
the run after an impersonation of her own and needs
Buchanan's help. With reporter Holly McCoy's assistance,
injured Buchanan traces all the leads to a newly discovered
ancient Mayan Mexican village. Strong language and violence.
1993.

Casino Moon  BR 9975
by Peter Blauner 
3 volumes
After college, Anthony Russo knows more than ever that he
doesn't want to follow his stepfather Vin's footsteps into
the mob. But Anthony's construction business is failing;
he's unhappily married to the niece of Vin's boss, Teddy;
and Teddy is calling his loans in. Vin tries to get Anthony
"made" by crediting him with a murder, while Anthony grasps
at a long-shot money venture and falls in love. Strong
language, violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex.
1994.

Cauldron  BR 9426
by Larry Bond 
6 volumes
By 1997 the New World Order has gone awry, and the entire
planet is in an economic mess. France and Germany have
joined together to form EurCon, with Russia planning to join
them. The United States and Britain have allied themselves
with new Eastern European countries against EurCon. Suddenly
France and Germany are locked in battle with Poland, and the
world is at war. Some violence and some strong language.
1993.

The Chamber  BR 9542
by John Grisham 
5 volumes
The chamber is of the gas variety and next in line for it is
Klan member Sam Cayhall. Sam is accused of the bombing
murder of the young twin sons of a Jewish attorney. After
two mistrials, Sam was free for over a decade before an
ambitious district attorney tried him again and won. Now a
new attorney steps forward to plead Sam's case. The lawyer
is Sam's grandson, who needs to discover more about his
family's past. Strong language and some violence. Bestseller
1994.

The Cheshire Moon  BR 9614
by Robert Ferrigno 
2 volumes
When Quinn's career as an investigative journalist came
screeching to a halt after he was blamed for setting a
killer free, it was Quinn's flaky friend Andy who came to
his rescue. Now it's payback time; Andy witnessed a murder
and the huge assassin with a crew-cut is after him. Quinn
frantically untangles the murderer's blackmail motives but
not in time to save Andy. And now the hulk is after Quinn.
Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex.
1993.

The Client  BR 9551
by John Grisham 
4 volumes
The client is eleven-year-old Mark Sway, who retained lawyer
Reggie Love with a one-dollar bill. The reason Mark needs a
lawyer is the same reason his eight-year-old brother is
comatose in the hospital from shock--they witnessed a
suicide. The victim was a lawyer and unfortunately he told
Mark something before he died--something the police, the
FBI, and the mafia are very interested in. Strong language
and some violence. Bestseller 1993.

Commission  BR 9984
by Finn Carling 
1 volume
A once-famous writer who has isolated himself with his dog
on the island of Corsica has become so detached that he
refers to himself in the third person. Then an eccentric and
wealthy family breaks his solitude with a commission, more
like a demand, for the writer to produce a book about their
son. The reclusive writer is drawn out of himself and his
surroundings to investigate the circumstances of the young
man's mysterious death. 1991.

Criminal Conversation  BR 9797
by Evan Hunter 
3 volumes
New York District Attorney Michael Welles learns that young
playboy Andrew Faviola is acting head of the Mafia operation
run by his imprisoned father, Anthony Faviola. Planning to
take him down, Welles orders heavy surveillance of the
younger Faviola. What Welles doesn't realize is that his
wife is having an affair with the mafioso, who has hidden
his true identity from her. Strong language, violence, and
explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.

Criminal Damage  BR 9685
by Margaret Yorke 
2 volumes
Mrs. Newton, an English widow, never stays long in one
house; she fixes it up and moves on. But her enjoyable,
tidy, solitary life begins to unravel when her daughter
Jennifer's live-in boyfriend leaves her for another woman.
Jennifer reacts badly, stalking the couple and vandalizing
their things. Mrs. Newton's secret past makes her qualified
to counsel Jennifer, but now she has some dreadful problems
of her own. 1992.

Dangerous to Know  BR 9677
by Margaret Yorke 
2 volumes
Housewife Hermione Brown's life has become intolerable since
her daughters have left home and her demanding husband
Walter keeps her a virtual prisoner. Timid Hermione begins
to save up for her escape by secretly cleaning houses.
Meanwhile, Walter is creating a secret life of his own by
stalking a woman he becomes obsessed with on the train. If
he can't act on this obsession, sadistic Walter may take it
out on Hermione and others. Violence. 1993.

Deep Sleep  BR 10215
by Frances Fyfield 
1 volume
Just when pharmacist Pip Carlton tires of his annoying wife,
she dies in her sleep. This leaves him free to pursue his
voluptuous assistant, Kim Perry. But Kim's ex-husband,
Duncan, a detective constable, is still furtively watching
Kim's movements. And, though recovering from surgery,
prosecuter Helen West, who previously appeared in Question
of Guilt (BR 9721), has questions about Mrs. Carlton's
death. Strong language and violence. 1991.

Doll's Eyes  BR 9624
by Bari Wood 
3 volumes
Like her mother and grandmother before her, wealthy Eve
Klein is clairvoyant. It's not a gift she relishes--her
estranged husband, Sam, can't handle it anymore. Attempting
a reconciliation with Sam, Eve drives to his small-town
rental house--only to have a horrifying vision in his
driveway. The murder is the latest of five serial killings,
and the killer isn't happy to learn about Eve. Strong
language, violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex.
1993.

Eyes of a Child  BR 9825
by Richard North Patterson 
5 volumes
Attorney Terri Peralta leaves her emotionally abusive
husband, Ricardo Arias, and begins a relationship with her
boss, Chris Paget. Unemployed Arias demands custody of
daughter Elena and accuses Paget's son Carlo of sexually
abusing Elena. When Arias is found dead, police suspect
Paget, whose campaign for the Senate would have been ruined
by Arias. Some violence and some explicit descriptions of
sex. 1994.

The Firm  BR 9707
by John Grisham 
4 volumes
Bendini, Lambert, and Locke is a Memphis law firm
specializing in taxes and making millionaires. The extensive
dossier it has on Mitchell Y. McDeere indicates he is just
the man for their firm. To Mitch, their job offer seems too
good to be true. He accepts, and it isn't long before he
begins to realize that the firm is not what it appears to
be. Suddenly Mitch finds himself between a rock and a hard
place. Some strong language. Bestseller 1991.

Floating City: A Nicholas Linnear Novel  BR 9818
by Eric Lustbader 
4 volumes
Floating City, in the Vietnam jungle, is controlled by Rock,
an American who has created a powerful nuclear weapon, the
Torch. It is up to Nicholas Linnear to locate Rock and
destroy the Torch. Linnear gets help from his friend Lew
Croaker but must face demons from his past before he can
complete his mission. Sequel to The Kaisho (BR 9447).
Violence, strong language, and explicit descriptions of sex.
1994.

The Forty Fathom Bank: Novella  BR 9832
by Les Galloway 
1 volume
The narrator recalls the year 1940 in San Francisco when,
worried about how he would support his family, he settled on
a get-rich-quick scheme involving shark fishing. He bought
an old boat and hired an experienced fisherman. But life at
sea proved difficult, especially when the narrator was
called upon to cope with rough waters, a silent partner, a
dead engine, and--most dangerous--an overactive imagination.
Some strong language. 1984.

Inca Gold  BR 9621
by Clive Cussler 
5 volumes
A group of archaeologists is exploring a Peruvian sinkhole
and gets in trouble. Dirk Pitt happens to be in the
neighborhood and comes to their aid. But the rescue simply
sets in motion a series of events that finds Pitt looking
for lost treasure, being captured by a band of art
smugglers, and swimming through an uncharted underground
river. Violence and strong language. Bestseller 1994.

The Indictment  BR 9955
by MacKenzie Canter 
3 volumes
Kendall Wilkinson grew up with Peyton, who is now married to
Kendall's cousin, Roger Dufault. Kendall and Peyton have an
affair, and six months later, Roger, who is facing fraud
charges, is found beaten to death in a motel room. Handling
Roger's estate, Kendall discovers a cryptic letter from his
own uncle. Before Kendall can find the link, his uncle dies,
revealing a sordid, dangerous hobby. Strong language and
violence. 1994.

Just Killing Time  BR 9459
by Derek Van Arman 
5 volumes
Home at night, a woman feels a chill pass through her and
attributes it to a virus. Within minutes she and her two
daughters are killed, soon to be added to Jack Scott's
caseload of serial killings. When young Elmer Janson
uncovers a clue to a long-ago death, he and his mother are
targeted to die next. With the help of a local policeman,
Scott races to save the Jansons. Strong language, violence,
and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1992.

The Kaisho: A Nicholas Linnear Novel  BR 9447
by Eric Lustbader 
5 volumes
In the sequel to The White Ninja (BR 8112), Nicholas Linnear
is asked to fulfil a long-ago promise to help a Japanese
underworld leader, the Kaisho. The gangster has been trying
to stymie an evil international conglomerate and is now
marked for death. Meanwhile, his would-be assassin's related
attack on an American mob boss has brought Linnear's friend
Lew Croaker out of retirement. Strong language, violence,
and explicit descriptions of sex. 1993.

Kiss of the Wolf  BR 9893
by Jim Shepard 
2 volumes
Recently separated, high school teacher Joanie Mucherino is
driving her son, Todd, home from his confirmation party when
she hits a man in the road. Realizing he's dead, Joanie
can't bring herself to notify the police, much to Todd's
dismay. The next day they learn the victim was a friend of
car salesman Bruno Minea, who has had a crush on Joanie
since childhood. And Bruno is determined to find the
hit-and-run driver. Strong language and some violence. 1994.

The Lasko Tangent  BR 10255
by Richard North Patterson 
2 volumes
U.S. Attorney Christopher Paget is a member of the Economic
Crimes Commission in Washington, D.C. He believes that
William Lasko, a Korean war hero and close friend of the
president, is involved in shady deals and money laundering.
Paget's one source of information, Alexander Lehman, has
promised to tell all but is killed in a hit-and-run accident
before he can. Prequel to Degree of Guilt (BR 9811). Strong
language and some violence. 1979.

The Masters of the House: A Novel of Suspense  BR 9899
by Robert Barnard 
2 volumes
When Ellen Heenan and her newborn baby die, her husband,
Dermot, breaks down. Panicked that their family will be
broken up if word gets out, young Matthew and his sister
Annie take over caring for the two younger children. But
Carmen O'Keefe, a woman rumored to have had an affair with
Dermot, demands to see him. When she is found dead in their
garden, the children must cover that up, too. Strong
language and some violence. 1994.

The Mediterranean Caper  BR 9620
by Clive Cussler 
2 volumes
It is a quiet Sunday afternoon at Brady Field on the island
of Thasos in the Aegean Sea. Then suddenly an old World War
I biplane appears out of nowhere and attacks the
installation. Off the coast, the First Attempt, part of the
National Underwater Marine Agency, is hit with a series of
"accidents." Major Dirk Pitt, sent to investigate, keeps
remembering a plane shot down sixty years earlier. Some
strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1973.

Mind Prey  BR 10052
by John Sandford 
3 volumes
When psychiatrist Andi Manette and her two daughters are
kidnapped, everyone thinks it's for her wealthy family's
money. Instead, their abductor is John Mail, a former
patient who is obsessed with Manette. When Mail learns
Deputy Chief Lucas Davenport, who also appeared in Night
Prey (BR 9692), is heading up the investigation, he is
thrilled. Mail is a gamer who has played Davenport's
computer games. Strong language and violence. Bestseller
1995.

Night Prey  BR 9692
by John Sandford 
3 volumes
Koop has two bad habits: he's a cat burglar and he stabs
women to death. When he becomes obsessed with Sara Jensen
after robbing her apartment, he increases his assaults.
Alarmed, his two pursuers search wildly for clues to
identify him. Feminist investigator Meagan Connell vows
that, with or without Lucas Davenport's help, she will
capture Koop before her cancer kills her. Strong language,
violence, and some descriptions of sex. 1994.

The Pelican Brief  BR 9731
by John Grisham 
3 volumes
Two Supreme Court Justices are murdered on the same night.
One is very old and extremely liberal; the other is young,
erratically conservative, and a closet homosexual. A top law
student, Darby Shaw, makes the mistake of investigating the
cases due to eventually come before the high court and
pinpoints the mastermind behind the murders. Now Darby's
running for her life. Violence, strong language, and
explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1992.

The Rainmaker  BR 10091
by John Grisham 
4 volumes
Before Rudy Baylor graduates from law school and starts his
new job, he must provide free legal advice at a senior
center. His clients are a couple whose grown son is dying of
leukemia and whose insurance company has abandoned them.
Rudy's excitement over their promising case is dashed by the
news that his much-needed job offer has been withdrawn. And
that's only the beginning of his bad-luck streak. Some
strong language. Bestseller 1995.

Riding the Rap  BR 10359
by Elmore Leonard 
2 volumes
Retiring bookie Harry Arno sends bounty hunter Bobby Deo to
collect money owed him by Chip Ganz. Instead, Chip convinces
Bobby to help him and ex-convict Louis Lewis kidnap Harry.
Luckily for Harry, his former girlfriend Joyce is now dating
federal marshal Raylan Givens. Raylan is not too thrilled
with Harry, but he is a fair man and good at tracking people
and escorting them to prison to "ride the rap." Strong
language and some violence. 1995.

The Simeon Chamber  BR 9729
by Steve Martini 
3 volumes
Attorney Sam Bogardus's irritation over his mother's
"referring" another client to him turns to interest when he
hears Jennifer Davies's story. Her father had been one of a
two-man crew that disappeared from a naval blimp. Years
later, Jennifer has received pages from a pirate's journal
with a note implying that her father is still alive. Sam's
investigation quickly turns ugly: he is attacked and his
partner murdered. Strong language and violence. 1988.

Spandau Phoenix  BR 9658
by Greg Iles 
6 volumes
On May 10, 1941, Rudolf Hess flew to England for a meeting
with the duke of Hamilton. But was it Hess who met with the
duke, or was it his pilot? Now in 1987, Spandau Prison is
being demolished. The last prisoner--number seven--has
committed suicide. Or has he been murdered? And was he
really Hess? Hans Apfel finds some papers at Spandau that
may answer those questions, but now he and his wife are in
great danger. Violence and strong language. Bestseller 1993.

Star Flight  BR 9409
by Phyllis A. Whitney 
2 volumes
Lauren Castle never thought she would go to North
Carolina--her husband Jim had been killed there while
working on a documentary about the life of Roger Brandt and
Victoria Frazer. But a note signed simply "N" compels her.
Perhaps in venturing to the state she can find out why Jim
was killed, learn more about the ill-fated love affair
between her grandparents, Roger and Victoria, and discover
who is responsible for Victoria's death. 1993.

Street  BR 10158
by Jack Cady 
2 volumes
Homeless regulars at the Sanctuary, a boarded-up Seattle
church, include an actor, a vet called Symptomatic Nerve
Gas, a former nun called Silk, a black poet named Elgin, and
Hal, who acts like a medieval knight. A serial killer has
taken someone they know from the street, and now a
neighbor's daughter is missing. The unlikely group set out
to trap the person they come to think of as an inhuman
demon. Some strong language and some violence. 1994.

Strike Zone  BR 9789
by Jim Bouton and Eliot Asinof 
3 volumes
The last game of the season as seen from the perspectives of
two competing characters. Sam Ward, a thirty-two-year-old
rookie, gets a chance to pitch for the Chicago Cubs in a
crucial game against the Phillies, but he isn't getting the
signals he needs to prove himself. And sixty-year-old
veteran umpire Ernie Kolacka makes the calls under
considerable pressure to throw his last game. Strong
language. 1994.

The Terminal Man  BR 9630
by Michael Crichton 
2 volumes
After a car accident, thirty-four-year-old computer
scientist Harry Benson experiences blackouts during which he
engages in violent behavior. In addition, he has a growing
paranoia that machines are taking over the earth. In a test
case, doctors implant a computer in Harry to control the
blackouts. But before they can perfect the interface, Harry
escapes. Will the computer fuel his violent paranoia?
Violence and strong language. 1972.

A Time to Kill  BR 9876
by John Grisham 
4 volumes
In Clanton, Mississippi, black, ten-year-old Tonya Hailey is
raped, tortured, and left for dead by two white men. She
survives and identifies her abductors, who are quickly
arrested. Tonya's father, Carl Lee Hailey, takes matters
into his own hands, shooting and killing the two prisoners.
As his attorney prepares Carl Lee's case, the town is
overrun with reporters and avenging Klansmen. Violence, some
strong language, and some descriptions of sex. 1989.

War of the Raven  BR 9492
by Andrew Kaplan 
4 volumes
The scene is 1939 Argentina, and as the war in Europe
escalates, the number of spies grows. Charles Stewart, an
American agent, is sent to Buenos Aires to locate and
protect the Raven, one of the Allies' intelligence sources.
The only link to the mole, an Argentinian playboy, has been
brutally murdered, and Stewart must locate Raven before it's
too late. Violence, strong language, and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1989.

War Stories

Firefall  BR 9806
by Ed Ruggero 
4 volumes
Operation Solid Steel is supposed to be a series of practice
maneuvers between U.S. Army Rangers led by Major Mark Isen
and the German army. The Rangers have parachuted into German
territory near the North Sea, where they are to engage the
so-called enemy. But instead of the friendly Germans they
expect, they are confronted by the ultra-rightist German
People's Union--and the Rangers have no live ammunition!
Violence and strong language. 1994.

Nightfather  BR 10204
by Carl Friedman 
1 volume
A young girl explains how her father always talks to his
children about the horrors of his Holocaust experience. She
says he "has camp" and his eyes look like the wolf's at the
zoo, who must "have camp," too. She wants to be invisible
when she grows up so the SS won't find her. Meanwhile, one
brother carries toothpaste like the prisoners did for
thirst, and another tries to freeze his feet in the
refrigerator. Strong language and violence. 1994.

Schindler's List  BR 9689
by Thomas Keneally 
4 volumes
In 1939, Oskar Schindler, a young, wealthy, enterprising
German interested in drinking and women, is a
less-than-exemplary Catholic. In this "nonfiction novel,"
Keneally tells the story of Schindler's transformation into
a man who, at great personal risk, saves hundreds of Jews
from death during World War II. Violence and some strong
language. Bestseller 1982.

Westerns

Billy Bayes  BR 10254
by Tom Clarke 
2 volumes
It was a lucky day for Billy Bayes when Josh Clemens offered
him a job on the Rocking J Ranch. Josh has been hard on
Billy, but Billy has become an excellent ranch hand. He is
even chosen to meet the boss's sister, daughter, and new
Arabian stallion at the train station and escort them to the
ranch. But Billy faces unforeseen trouble from the minute
the horse is led from the train. 1994.

Bleeding Kansas  BR 9669
by Jon Sharpe 
2 volumes
Some suspicious deaths have occurred in the battle over the
slavery issue in the small town of Buckeye Springs, Kansas.
Concerned, President Buchanan dispatches justice agent
Canyon O'Grady to sort it out. After seducing one woman on
the train to Kansas, O'Grady becomes involved with the
daughter of a murder victim, leaving him precious little
time to investigate. Strong language, some violence, and
explicit descriptions of sex. 1990.

Brules  BR 9399
by Harry Combs 
6 volumes
Brules relates that back in 1867, when he was eighteen, he
found himself an honest whore named Michelle. Only trouble
is, he has to kill his boss to claim her. From then on, they
are on the run--until a group of Comanches capture her and
burn her to death. Then Brules, with time out for
buffalo-hunting and mule-driving, sets out for revenge.
Violence, strong language, and some descriptions of sex.
1992.

City of Widows  BR 10212
by Loren D. Estleman 
2 volumes
Page Murdock is tired of being involved with the law in
Montana and is moving to New Mexico where he has bought part
interest in a saloon, the Apache Princess. Montana judge
Harlan Blackthorne suggests that Murdock get a letter of
reference from New Mexico's governor to pave the way with
Sheriff Baronet. But there is an ulterior motive behind
Blackthorne's suggestion to befriend Baronet. Strong
language. 1994.

Coldiron  BR 9970
by F.M. Parker 
2 volumes
Disguised as a boy and hired as a ranch hand by horse
breeder Luke Coldiron, Cristine plans her revenge on
Coldiron for her mother's death. Then she learns she owes
her life to the man. Violence and some strong language.
1984.

Galloway  BR 9514
by Louis L'Amour 
2 volumes
Flagan Sackett finds himself a fugitive in the mountains
with only his wits as defense against the Apache warriors
and the hungry wolves stalking him. 1970.

God's Country  BR 10206
by Percival Everett 
2 volumes
When Curt Marder sees a gang of men burning down his house
and barn, killing his dog, and kidnapping his wife, he has
half a mind to ride up to them and say something, but
doesn't. Later, he decides to hire black tracker Bubba to
help find his wife. The men are joined by young Jake, who
claims the same gang killed his parents. The three get in a
heap of trouble. Strong language and violence. 1994.

It's Your Misfortune and None of My Own: Code of the West,
Book 1  BR 10126
by Stephen Bly 
2 volumes
Zach Hatcher and Suzanne Cedar have been corresponding for
two years and now plan to marry. But as they travel toward
one another, they are both mortally wounded. Prison escapee
Tap Andrews, who is with Zach when he dies, takes on his
identity. Dance hall girl Pepper Paige becomes Suzanne.
Neither is Christian as Zach and Suzanne had been, but
perhaps they can put aside the past and begin new lives
together. 1994.

The Lonely Men  BR 9572
by Louis L'Amour 
2 volumes
When Tell Sackett receives an urgent plea from the wife of
his brother, Orrin, to rescue Orrin's son from the Apaches,
Tell has no idea that the embittered woman is setting a trap
for him. But by the time he and his comrades have completed
their adventure in the mountainous Arizona Apache territory,
Tell has devised a way to pay her back. Some strong language
and some violence. 1969.

Mustang Man  BR 9556
by Louis L'Amour 
2 volumes
Nolan Sackett, also known as "Mustang Man," is one tough
cowboy. But he can be softhearted when it comes to women in
distress; so even though he is being chased across the
Southwest by a posse, he stops to rescue a woman. It takes
Sackett time to figure out that she is not what she seems,
and no sooner does he shoot his way out of her clutches than
he trusts another woman who spells trouble. 1966.

Ride the Dark Trail  BR 9568
by Louis L'Amour 
2 volumes
Widow Emily Talon is wearing down. Since the last worker on
her Colorado ranch was killed, she has kept a
twenty-four-hour vigil against Jake Flanner and his men, who
are conspiring to take over her ranch. Hearing of the
woman's plight, drifter Logan Sackett discovers that, like
him, Emily is a Tennessee Sackett. Vowing to help her until
her wandering sons return, Logan is determined to teach Jake
Flanner's men a lesson. Some strong language and violence.
1972.

The Sackett Brand  BR 9571
by Louis L'Amour 
1 volume
Forty gunslingers from the Lazy A Ranch plan to hang Tell
Sackett if they can catch him, but the rest of the
Sacketts--politicians, outlaws, cattlemen, bankers, and
tinkers--come to Tell's rescue. Some strong language and
some violence. 1965.

Sackett's Land  BR 9555
by Louis L'Amour 
2 volumes
The Sackett saga goes back to England and follows Barnabas
Sackett from his struggles in the English countryside and
intrigue in Elizabethan London to the New World, where he
establishes a western dynasty. Some strong language and some
violence. 1974.

The Secret of Snake Canyon  BR 9451
by Terrell L. Bowers 
1 volume
Reese Corbett, deputy marshal out of Sacramento, is put on
the case of missing Chinese immigrants--hundreds of them.
Not knowing the language, Corbett is told to enlist the help
of Alley Cat, the half-white, half-Chinese, orphaned
daughter of a "joy girl." But evil Chinese lord Hoy Quan has
other plans for the young woman. Dismayed to learn that Cat
has been kidnapped, Corbett sets out on the still-warm
trail. Violence. 1993.

Single Tree  BR 10181
by Gary D. Svee 
2 volumes
Newly arrived in Montana, Samuel Wilders leaves his wife and
children in the shade of a single cottonwood tree to search
for a horse to buy. Instead, he is confronted by rancher
Tolkien and lynched as a rustler. Horrified, Tolkien's young
Cree ranch hand, Runs Toward, quits his job. He finds the
starving Wilders family and repeats a kindness that he
received as a child. Strong language and violence. 1994.

The Sky-liners  BR 9576
by Louis L'Amour 
2 volumes
The two Sackett brothers, Flagan and Galloway, run into
Black Fetchen's gang in town, and a feud develops. The
Sacketts are good fighters, but they must contend with the
best gunslingers in the country. Some strong language and
some violence. 1967.

Star of Empire: A Novel of Old San Antonio  BR 9452
by Leonard Sanders 
4 volumes
Corrie McNair is expected to marry Ramsey Cothburn and reign
in 1830s Charleston society. But Tad Logan of Savannah
arrives in town and steals Corrie away. Along with her
sister Prue and his brother Whit, Corrie and Tad head to San
Antonio de B‚xar. There Tad and Whit become involved in
efforts to create an independent country, Ramsey arrives to
reclaim Corrie, and Prue has her own romantic problems. Some
violence. 1992.

Stark's Justice: A Judge Earl Stark Western  BR 9708
by James Reasoner 
2 volumes
When stagecoach guard Earl Stark listens in on a murder
trial, he realizes a man is going to be hanged illegally.
Compelled to step in and straighten things out, Stark
displays a knowledge of the law that earns him a quick
entrance into the bar. But when Stark's lady friend is shot
down, he forgets his new profession. As far as he's
concerned, her killers are already tried and convicted.
Strong language and violence. 1994.


