Emerging Infectious Diseases
[Volume 5 No.5 / September - October 1999]


Dispatches

Epidemic Typhus Imported from Algeria

M. Niang,* P. Brouqui,*† and D. Raoult†

*Hopital Felix Houphoüet Boigny, Marseilles, France;
and †Universitè de la Mèditerranèe, Facultè De
Mèdecine, Marseilles, France

-------------------------------------------------------
     We report epidemic typhus in a French patient
     returning from Algeria. The diagnosis was
     confirmed by serologic testing and the
     isolation of Rickettsia prowazekii in blood.
     Initially the patient was thought to have
     typhoid fever. Because body lice are
     prevalent in industrialized regions, the
     introduction of typhus to pediculosis-endemic
     areas poses a serious public health risk.

Epidemic typhus, caused by Rickettsia prowazekii, is
transmitted in the feces of the infected body louse.
Body lice live in clothing and are easily controlled
by good personal hygiene. Louse-infested populations
are primarily those who live in extreme poverty.
Typhus has been associated with war, famine, refugee
camps, cold weather, and conditions that lead to
domestic crowding and reduced personal hygiene, like
those found in Algeria because of the ongoing civil
war (1,2).

In October 1998, a 65-year-old man came to the Felix Houphoüet Boigny Hospital of Tropical Medicine in Marseilles, France, for evaluation of fever, nausea,
vomiting, myalgias, and diarrhea. He was a native Algerian, who lived in France but had visited Msila, a small town in east central Algeria, for 3 months. The patient recalled pruritis and scratching during his stay in Algeria. However, no lice were found on his clothing. He had a temperature of 40°C, relative bradycardia with a heart rate of 70 beats per minute, blood pressure of 110/60 mm Hg, mild confusion, a discrete rash (a few rose spots on the trunk) (Figure 1), and splenomegaly. Laboratory findings showed a normal
white blood cell count and increased serum lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH 1032 IU/L) and aspartate
aminotransferase (AST 85 IU/L) concentrations. The
chest radiograph was normal. A presumptive diagnosis
of typhoid fever was made, and treatment with
intravenous ceftriaxone, 3 g/day (3), was started
immediately after samples of blood, urine, and stool
were obtained for bacterial cultures. All cultures
remained negative on hospital day 3, but the patient's
clinical condition continued to worsen. He had now
become semicomatose, remained febrile, and had severe
dyspnea and purpuric rash (Figure 2).

Laboratory follow-up showed that the patient had severe
thrombocytopenia (4,900 thrombocytes/mm3), and elevated
serum creatinine phosphokinase (CK 1,4813 IU/L), AST (422 IU/L), LDH (2,373 IU/L), and creatinine (143 micromoles/L)
concentrations. Coagulation studies suggested disseminated
intravascular coagulation and acute renal failure (serum
creatinine 143 micromoles/L). The patient was severely hypoxic, and a repeated chest radiograph showed bilateral interstitial pneumonia (Figure 3). The diagnosis was now suspected to be typhus (murine or epidemic) rather than typhoid fever, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit, where he was started on intravenous doxycycline, 200 mg/d. His clinical condition improved rapidly, and he became afebrile within 3 days. Doxycycline was stopped after 10 days, when the patient had recovered.

The diagnosis of epidemic typhus was established by
demonstrating increasing antibody titers from the
acute to the convalescent- phase of illness, with the
presence of immunoglobulin (Ig) M to R. prowazekii
(micro-immunofluorescence titer IgG <1:80 and IgM <80
to IgG 1:4,096 and IgM titer 1:256) in serum samples
collected 6 days apart (4). The diagnosis was
confirmed by the isolation of R. prowazekii in blood
(shell vial technique), followed by polymerase chain
reaction identification of specific DNA in blood by
using primers reacting with the citrate synthetase
gene and verified by gene product sequencing (4).

Because the patient had returned from Algeria, a country where enteric fever is prevalent, the illness was misdiagnosed as typhoid fever, and the patient was treated with ceftriaxone (3). On average, the rash of epidemic
typhus appears on day 5 of illness and consists initially of
pink macules in the axillary areas, which subsequently spread over the trunk and limbs and eventually become petechial. While petechiae are reported in 33% of patients with typhus, the initial pinkish macules are reported in
only 5% of typhus cases (5). Thus, epidemic typhus may
be very difficult to distinguish from typhoid fever in
the early phase of illness.

Chloramphenicol has been effective against both
typhoid fever and typhus. Co-trimoxazole, which may be
used to treat typhoid fever, is not effective against
rickettsial agents (6), and a patient who was treated
with ciprofloxacin for suspected typhoid fever died of
typhus (7). The persistently negative blood culture
results, combined with the development of petechiae
and failure to improve on ceftriaxone, led us to
consider the diagnosis of typhus rather than typhoid
fever, since rickettsia are resistant to beta-lactam
antibiotics (6). The death rate of untreated epidemic
typhus is approximately 15%; this rate is reduced to
0.5% with a single 200-mg dose of doxycycline (1).
Therefore, epidemic typhus should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of typhoid fever, in particular
when epidemiologic conditions may have led to contact
with body lice.

Typhus has not been reported in Algeria for several
decades (8). Because infection is lifelong, humans are
regarded as the main reservoir of the bacteria.
Recrudescence in the form of Brill-Zinsser disease may
act as the source of an outbreak, but wide spread
cannot occur without louse infestation, as recent
outbreaks in Burundi (1) and Russia (2) have shown.
Body lice are prevalent among the homeless in
industrialized regions such as Marseilles, France. The
importation of typhus by an infected patient could
start an outbreak within this exposed population, as
has occurred with trench fever (9). Disease
surveillance, delousing of exposed persons, and
improvement of the living conditions of populations at
risk should prevent the reemergence of louse-borne
diseases in industrialized countries.

Figure 1 [Fig]

Figure 1. Rose spots-like skin lesion on the trunk (day 4).

Figure 2 [Fog]

Figure 2. Diffuse petechial rash of epidemic typhus (day 7).

Figure 3 [Fig]

Figure 3. Bilateral interstitial pneumonia (day 7).

Acknowledgment

The authors thank J. Bakken for review of the manuscript for
English.

Dr. Niang is a fellow in the infectious disease and tropical
medicine unit at the Houphouet Boigny University Hospital,
Marseilles, France. His fields of interest are rickettsial diseases and bacterial infections.

References

     1. Raoult D, Ndihokubwayo JB, Tissot-Dupont H, Roux V, Faugere B, Abegbinni R, et al. Outbreak of epidemic typhus associated with trench fever in Burundi. Lancet 98;352:353-8.

     2. Tarasevich I, Rydkina E, Raoult D. Outbreak of epidemic typhus in Russia. Lancet 1998;352:1151.

     3. Islam A, Butler T, North S. Randomized treatment of patients with typhoid fever by using ceftriaxone or chloramphenico. J Infect Dis 1988;158:742-7.

     4. La Scola B, Raoult D. Laboratory diagnosis of rickettsioses: current approaches to diagnosis of old and new rickettsial diseases. J Clin Microbiol 1997;35:2715-27.

     5. Perine PL, Chandler BP, Krause DK, McCardle P, Awoke S, Habte-Gabr E, et al. A clinico-epidemiological study of epidemic typhus in Africa. Clin Infect Dis 1992;14:1149-58.

     6. Raoult D, Roux V. Rickettsioses as paradigms of new or emerging infectious diseases. Clin Microbiol Rev 1997;10:694-719.

     7. Zanetti G, Francioli P, Tagan D, Paddock CD, Zaki SR. Imported epidemic typhus. Lancet 1998;352:1709.

     8. Le Corroller Y, Neel R, Lecubarri R. Le typhus exanthematique au Sahara. Arch Inst Pasteur Alger 1970;48:125-30.

     9. Brouqui P, Lascola B, Roux V, Raoult D. Chronic Bartonella quintana bacteremia in homeless patients. N Engl J Med 1999;340:184-9.

Address for correspondence: D. Raoult, Unitè des Rickettsies, CNRS UPRES A 6020, Universitè de la Mèditerranèe, Facultè de Mèdecine, 27 Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13385 Marseilles Cedex 05, France; fax: 334-91-83-0390; e-mail: Didier.Raoult@medecine.univ-mrs.fr.

Emerging Infectious Diseases
National Center for Infectious Diseases
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Atlanta, GA

URL: ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/EID/vol5no5/ascii/niang.txt

Please note that figures and equations are not available in ASCII format; their placement within the text is noted by [fig] and [eq], respectively. Greek symbols are spelled out. The following codes are used: (ft) for footnote; (sup) for superscript; (sub) for subscript; >/= for greater than or equal to.
