                                           Release No. 0044.00 
Trans Atlantic Consumer Dialogue
Remarks
          As Prepared for Delivery
                               by
              Secretary of Agriculture Dan Glickman
                Trans Atlantic Consumer Dialogue
             Washington, D.C.    February 10, 2000

     "Thank you Mr. Cohen (Felix, Director of Consumentbond).  I also want to
thank Commissioner Byrne.   I want to thank the Trans Atlantic Consumer
Dialogue for inviting me here today.

     "With me today from USDA is Cathie Woteki, Under Secretary for Food
Safety who has worked tirelessly to ensure that USDA's food safety regime
evolves alongside the ever-changing nature of food production and consumption
... Caren Wilcox, our tireless Deputy Under Secretary for Food Safety who is
our primary contact with the TACD (TACK-DEE) food group ... Isi Siddiqui, my
Senior Advisor on Trade, and Eric Olsen, my Senior Advisor on Domestic Policy,
both of whom have been with me at the forefront of many difficult issues.  I
must testify before the Senate this morning, but they will remain in my
absence to answer your questions.  

     "In the last half of the 20th century, we witnessed the emergence of
three trends that had a profound influence on everyday life   increased
consumption by consumers, the exponential rise in international trade and the
rapid advancement of science and technology.  

     "A century that began in relative isolationism ended with newly opened
borders, increased communications and crumbling trade barriers.  The Berlin
Wall has fallen and democracy is flourishing.  We are on our way to more trade
with the world's largest, and what was once one of the world's most closed
nations   China.

     "The world is becoming increasingly interconnected.  Both the demand
for, and the movement of goods and services around the world are influencing
daily decisions on the consumer level as well as the business level.  What a
farmer plants, what a homemaker buys, or where a CEO builds a new factory, are
all being driven by consumerism and the rise of trade. 

     "It's so important that the Trans Atlantic Consumer Dialogue brings
together consumers from two different continents so that we may learn from
each other's experiences.  The dialogue recognizes that the emergence of the
global economy takes international relations to the next level   to
international interdependence.  

     "It's no secret that people grouse about their governments   no matter
what country they're in.  It's part of the process, but there are certain
things people have come to expect of their government.   The fact is, in the
United States, people have come to trust their government when it comes to
issues of their safety and security.  The American people look to their
government to protect them in ways they cannot protect themselves -- whether
it comes to the banks that hold their life savings, the airlines that fly
millions each day, the prescription medicines they take, the safety of their
cars and highways, and more. 

     "As policymakers we in American government recognize that everything we
do is derived from the will of the people.  It is the foundation of our
democracy.  It is a sacred trust, one that must be guarded and never taken for
granted.  That is why the regulatory systems we put in place must be open,
subject to public scrutiny and, ultimately, public approval.  That is why we
must insist on objective, strong, scientific standards in the regulations and
oversight procedures we set up involving public health, safety and security, 

     "At USDA we are a very consumer-oriented department.  Abraham Lincoln
called us the "people's department" -- a name we try to live up to every day. 
We are the nutrition department, setting the standards for a healthy diet. 
We're in charge of the nutrition safety net, administering Food Stamps, the
Women, Infants and Children's Program and the School Meals Program.  As the
department of rural America we serve America's country communities, ensuring
adequate housing, utilities, clean water, economic development and more. 
We're at the forefront of the President's initiative to close the digital
divide by bringing education and medical services to remote communities over
the Internet.

     "And, of vital importance in this rapidly changing economy, at USDA we
house three of the six federal agencies that share the responsibility for
ensuring the continued safety of the nation's food supply -- the Food Safety
and Inspection Service, the Agricultural Research Service and the Cooperative
State Research, Education and Extension Service. They along with the
Environmental Protection Agency, and the Department of Health and Human
Services' Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control
comprise the federal government's comprehensive food safety effort. 

     "I would like to talk about our food safety system as an example of
government agencies working with and responding to consumer needs.

     "The current food safety program, that these six agencies maintain,
evolved over nearly 100 years of growth, development and experimentation.  In
the early 1900s the American people let it be known, in no uncertain terms,
that ensuring the safety of the nation's food supply would henceforth be a
major federal government priority.  

     "As the world has changed, as population has grown, as trade has
increased, as we have become aware of new foodborne pathogens, so has our food
safety system matured.  We are continuously adapting to meet the food safety
challenges of an industry that produces and markets 400 billion pounds of food
each year. 

     "For example, we have just completed implementation of a new, science-
based  meat and poultry inspection program, HACCP   Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Point System.  
                                
     "HACCP was originally developed for NASA as a state-of-the-art
monitoring and inspection system to ensure that the food being sent into orbit
with our astronauts was free of pathogens.  

     "But to bring the program to the general public required extensive
review.  In the United States we require government agencies to be open and
accessible to the consuming public. 

     "So, before implementing the HACCP program we had over 35 public
meetings -- some of which I chaired   with consumers, industry and producer
groups.  These were open, public meeting that anyone could attend.  As the
rule took shape, we wanted to ensure that the public was involved every step
of the way, that the process was completely transparent and that the resulting
program was one the public would be confident in.  

     "Designed as a science-based system to test for and reduce levels of
harmful bacteria, in its first full year of operation HACCP made a profound
difference in reducing foodborne pathogens.  Compared to surveys taken before
HACCP came on line, the prevalence of salmonella found in meat and poultry
plants has gone down considerably -- for hogs and ground turkey, over 25%   
for ground beef, over 1/3 -- and for poultry the reduction is nearly 50%. 
This is a major improvement in public health protection.  And I think that's
worth repeating.  HACCP has reduced the incidence of contamination by 25% for
hogs and ground turkey, over 1/3 for ground beef, and nearly 50% for poultry. 
This in turn has helped to reduce foodborne illness across the country.

     "In 1997, President Clinton set the nation on a course to strengthen the
nation's food safety system.  The President's Food Safety Initiative is
already bearing fruit -- enhancing surveillance of foodborne disease,
developing a better coordinated response to outbreaks, working with industry
to strengthen education and training, revising science-based regulations, and
targeting new research.  This Administration is building a new national early
warning system to detect and respond to outbreaks of foodborne illness early
and to provide information to help prevent future outbreaks.  We have a
comprehensive campaign to inform consumers about the latest safe food handling
and cooking standards.

     "Continuing to invest in research is critical to maintaining a modern
food safety system.  We must develop rapid tests for bacteria like salmonella,
cryptosporidium and E-coli.  We must learn more about how and why pathogens
become resistant to efforts to control their growth.  We're working on new
methods for preventing, controlling and eliminating these deadly microbes. 
And we need to continue to monitor for chemical and physical hazards in our
food supply.

     "As well-developed, as strong, and as scientific as our food safety
system is, we cannot rest.  Make no mistake about it, these pathogens are
stubborn and resourceful.  That is why we have a complete farm to table
approach in dealing with food safety.  We must be in constant motion,
continually upgrading, researching and providing the flexibility to meet new
challenges that food production will offer. By ensuring the highest food
safety standards at every link in the food chain, we can reduce people's
exposure to foodborne pathogens. 

     "It is with this comprehensive food safety regime in mind, that I would
like to veer off for a moment and talk about an issue that is very topical for
the EU right now   using precaution as a an approach in the approval process. 
                                
     " I understand that the European Union has to face the major task of
coordinating food safety among its many member nations.  I welcome the steps
the EU is taking toward a unified comprehensive food safety process.  As I've
said, our food safety systems have been developed for over a century, are
based on strict scientific standards, include precaution in evaluating the
safety of foods, and have served our nation quite well.  I also welcome the
EU's assurance that their application of the precautionary strategies will not
be used as an artificial trade barrier.  And, as the dialogue among EU member
states continues, I look forward to seeing the details of how the
precautionary measures will be applied. 

     "Before closing, I'd like to say a word about biotechnology.  I'm of the
belief that biotechnology can be an indispensable tool in meeting growing
global agricultural demand while lessening the strain on our precious natural
resources.  It can also help farmers produce a new generation of specialty
products, to meet future consumer demand.

     "But regardless of biotechnology's potential, the consuming public, the
private sector, the academic community, the farm community and those of us in
government cannot be science's blind servants.   None of us should be afraid
to ask the difficult questions.   All of us have to understand ethical, safety
and environmental implications of biotechnology.  Our testing has to be
rigorous.  We have to be as vigilant as ever.  And we have to make sure that
those involved in determining the safety of genetically-engineered products
are independent from the people who stand to profit from them.  

     "The regulatory procedures we have in place are not only meeting the
challenges of biotechnology, but we are adapting them to grow and develop with
this new technology.  In order to keep pace with the rapidly changing
developments of such a relatively new science is one of the reasons I recently
appointed a biotechnology advisory committee, and why I asked the National
Academy of Sciences to create a standing biotechnology committee and to do an
independent review of our approval process.  Because we want to ensure that
the regulatory processes we rely on to protect public health and the
environment are state-of-the-art.

     "The health, safety and security of the American people depend on our
vigilance.  Food safety is but one example of the kind of comprehensive
oversight and regulation  that the American people expect when it comes to
their safety.  Procedures that have evolved over time, that withstand rigorous
testing, that are rooted in proven scientific principles and that put the
people first.

     "It has often been said the consumer is king and queen.  I believe that
is mostly a marketing reference -- referring to the success of a product based
on consumer acceptance.  And what we've seen in recent years is that consumer
acceptance also has a lot to do with safety     for example in food, autos or
bank accounts.  So whether or not government and industry are performing up to
public expectations will, in the end, be determined by the consumer at the
check-out counter, and, as evidenced by the evolution of globalization, that
check-out counter might be anywhere in the world. 

" Thank you".
                                
                                
