
Subject: 9808/City Code/Ch.21/Housing Code
Date: Thu, 17 May 1990 11:50:00 -0500


                                ORDINANCE NO. 9808
                  
                  
                   AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CHATTANOOGA CITY
                   CODE, PART II, SECTIONS 21-1 THROUGH 21-72,
                   RELATIVE TO THE MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
                   CONTAINED WITHIN ARTICLE I THEREOF AND
                   RENUMBERING ARTICLES II AND III THEREOF TO
                   REVISE THE HOUSING PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER 21.
                  
                  
                                                    
                  
                  
       	    	 SECTION 1.  BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE
       CITY OF CHATTANOOGA, TENNESSEE, That Chattanooga City Code, Part
       II, Sections 21-1 through 21-40, Article I, be and are hereby
       amended by deleting said sections in their entirety and
       substituting the following in lieu thereof:
                             ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
           
            Sec. 21-1.  Scope.
           
            	 This Code is to protect the public health, safety
            and welfare defining minimum housing standards which
            shall be maintained in all existing structures,
            residential and nonresidential, and on all existing
            premises.
           
            Sec. 21-2.  Effect of Provisions on Other Ordinances,
                        Power of City.
           
            	 Nothing in this Article shall be construed to
            impair or limit in any way the power of the City to
            define and declare nuisances and to their removal or
            abatement by summary procedures or otherwise.  The
            measures and procedures provided in this Article do not
            supersede and the Article does not repeal any other
            measures or procedures which are provided by this Code
            for the elimination, repair or correction of the
            conditions referred to in this Article, but the measures
            and procedure herein provided for shall be in addition
            to all other powers and authority of the City or
            inspector.
0C
            Sec. 21-3.  General.
           
            	 Any requirement not specifically covered by this
            Code, found necessary for the safety, health and general
            welfare of the occupants of any dwelling, shall be
            determined by the Code Official subject to appeal to the
            Better Housing Commission.
           
            Sec. 21-4.  Definitions.
           
            	 For the purpose of this Article, the following
            words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
            ascribed to them by this section.
           
            	 Accessory Structure means all structures including
            detached garages, storage buildings, fences and walls
            and other similar type structures.
           
            	 Alter or Alteration means change or modification in
            construction or occupancy.
           
            	 Approved shall mean approved by the building
            official.
           
            	 Basement shall mean a portion of a building located
            partly underground but having less than one-half (1/2)
            or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
            average grade of the adjoining ground.
           
            	 Building shall mean any structure or part thereof
            not a dwelling as defined in this Section.
           
            	 Building Code shall mean the building code
            officially adopted by the legislative body of this
            jurisdiction, or such other code as may be officially
            designated by the legislative body of the jurisdiction
            for the regulation of construction, alteration, repair,
            removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and
            maintenance of buildings and structures.
           
            	 Building Official shall mean the officer, or other
            person, charged with the administration and enforcement
            of Municipal Building Codes or his duly authorized
            representative.
           
            	 Cellar shall mean a portion of a building located
            partly or wholly underground, having one-half (1/2) or
            more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
            average grade of the adjoining ground.
           
            	 Code Official shall mean the official who is
            charged with the administration and enforcement of this
            code or any duly designated representative. (Better
            Housing Administrator)
           
            	 Condemn shall mean to adjudge unfit for use or
            occupancy.
           
            	 Dwelling shall mean any building or structure, or
            part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or
            intended to be so used, and including any outhouse and
            appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed
            therewith.
           
            	 Dwelling Unit shall mean any room or group of rooms
            located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable
            unit with facilities which are used or intended to be
            used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating.
           
            	 Extermination shall mean the control and
            extermination of insects, rodents, or other pests,
            eliminating their harborage places by removing or making
            inaccessible materials that may serve as their food by
            poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any
            other recognized and legal pest elimination methods.
           
            	 Family shall mean one (1) or more persons living
            together whether related by blood, marriage or adoption,
            and having common housekeeping facilities.
           
            	 Floor area shall mean the total area of all
            habitable space in a building or structure.
           
            	 Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste
            resulting from handling, preparation, cooking and
            consumption of food.
           
            	 Habitable Room shall mean a room or enclosed floor
            space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
            cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
            closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or
            communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
           
            	 Housing Commission shall mean the Better Housing
            Commission appointed to hear and determine questions of
            fact determined after a hearing.
           
            	 Infestation shall mean the presence within a
            dwelling of insects, rodents or other pests.
           
            	 Inspector shall mean the housing inspector of the
            city.
           
            	 Multiple Dwelling shall mean any building, or
            portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented,
            leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is
            occupied as the home or residence of more than two (2)
            families living independently of each other and doing
            their own cooking in such building, and shall include
            flats and apartments.
           
            	 Nuisance - the following shall be defined as
            nuisances:
           
             1.	 Any public nuisance known at common law or in
                 equity jurisprudence.
           
             2.	 Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental
                 to children whether in a building, on the premises
                 of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot.  This
                 includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or
                 excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor
                 vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or
                 structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or
                 vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive
                 minors.
           
             3.	 Whatever is dangerous to human life or is
                 detrimental to health, as determined by the health
                 officer.
           
             4.	 Overcrowding a room with occupants.
           
             5.	 Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
           
             6.	 Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing
                 facilities.
           
             7.	 Uncleanliness, as determined by the health officer.
           
             8.	 Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or
                 detrimental to the health of human beings, as
                 determined by the health officer.
           
            	 Occupant shall mean any person over one (1) year of
            age living sleeping, cooking or eating in or having
            actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
           
            	 Openable Area shall mean that part of a window or
            door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and
            which opens directly to the outdoors.
           
            	 Owner shall mean any person, agent, operator, firm,
            or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in
            the property, or recorded in the official record of the
            state, county or municipality as holding title to the
            property, or otherwise having control of the property,
            including the guardian of the estate of any such person,
            and the executor or administrator of the estate of such
            person if ordered to take possession of real property by
            a court.
           
            	 Operator shall mean any person who has charge, care
            or control of a building, or part thereof, in which
            dwelling units or rooming units are let.
           
            	 Parties in Interest shall mean all individuals,
            associations and corporations who have an interest of
            record in a dwelling or building or who are in
            possession thereof.
           
            	 Plumbing shall mean the practice, materials and
            fixtures used in the installation, maintenance,
            extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
            appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of
            the following:  sanitary drainage or storm drainage
            facilities, the venting system and the public or private
            water supply systems, within or adjacent to any
            building, structure or conveyance.  Also, the practice
            and materials used in the installation, maintenance,
            extension or alteration of storm water, liquid waste, or
            sewerage and water supply systems, or any premises to
            their connection with any point of public disposal or
            other acceptable terminal.
           
            	 Premises shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land
            including the buildings or structures thereon.
           
            	 Public Areas shall mean an unoccupied open space
            adjoining a building and on the same property that is
            permanently maintained accessible to the fire department
            and free of all incumbrances that might interfere with
            its use by the fire department.
           
            	 Public Record shall include deeds, deeds of trust
            and other instruments of record in the register's office
            of the county.
           
            	 Repair shall mean the replacement of existing work
            with an approved material similar to that used in the
            existing work, not including additional work that would
            change the structural safety of the building, or that
            would affect or change required exit facilities, a vital
            element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or
            heating installation, or that would be in violation of a
            provision of law or ordinance.  The term "repair" or
            "repairs" shall not apply to any change of construction.
           
            	 Required shall mean required by some provision of
            this chapter.
           
            	 Rooming House shall mean any dwelling or that part
            of any dwelling containing one (1) or more rooming
            units, in which space is let by the owner or occupant to
            three (3) or more persons who are not husband and wife,
            son or daughter, mother or father, sister or brother of
            the occupant.
           
            	 Rooming Unit shall mean any room or group of rooms
            forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be
            used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
            eating purposes.
           
            	 Rubbish shall mean combustible and noncombustible
            waste materials except for garbage, and the term shall
            include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke
            and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons,
            boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches,
            yard trimmings, tin cans, metal mineral matter, glass
            crockery and dust.
           
            	 Stairway shall mean one (1) or more flights of
            stairs and the necessary landings and platforms
            connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted
            passage from one story to another in a building or
            structure.
           
            	 Story shall mean that portion of a building
            included between the upper surface of any floor and the
            upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
            topmost story shall be that portion of a building
            included between the upper surface of the topmost floor
            and the ceiling or roof above.
           
            	 Structural Alteration shall mean any change except
            for repair or replacement in the supporting members of a
            building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
            girders.
           
            	 Structure shall mean that which is built or
            constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any
            piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
            joined together in some definite manner.  The term
            "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the
            works "or part thereof".
           
            	 Supplied shall mean paid for, furnished, or
            provided by or under control of the owner or operator.
           
            	 Temporary Housing shall mean any tent, trailer or
            other structure used for human shelter which is designed
            to be transportable and which is not attached to the
            ground, to another structure or to any utilities system
            on the same premises for more than thirty (30)
            consecutive days.
           
            	 Ventilation shall mean the process of supplying and
            removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from
            any space.
           
            	 Workmanlike shall mean that whenever the words
            "workmanlike state of maintenance and repair" are used
            in this Code they shall mean that such maintenance and
            repair be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
           
            	 Yard shall mean an open unoccupied space on the
            same lot with a building extending along the entire
            length or a street, or rear or interior lot line.
           
            Sec. 21-5.  Better Housing Commission Established.
           
            	 There is hereby created and established a Better
            Housing Commission.
           
            Sec. 21-6.  Same - Membership; Terms.
           
            	 The Better Housing Commission shall consist of
            fifteen (15) persons who are qualified voters of the
            city, to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the
            City Council.  They shall hold office for a term of
            three (3) years and until their successors are elected.
           
            Sec. 21-7.  Same - Compensation; Quorum.
           
            	 The members of the Better Housing Commission shall
            serve without compensation.  Seven (7) members shall
            constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
           
            Sec. 21-8.  Same - Meetings; Records.
           
            	 The Better Housing Commission shall meet in the
            assembly room at the City Hall at least once in each
            month and at such other times as may be necessary. 
            Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or by
            five (5) members upon giving notice to all members. 
            They shall keep a record of their proceedings.
           
            Sec. 21-9.  Authority Relative to Unfit Dangerous
                        Buildings.
           
            	 The Better Housing Commission shall:
            
            (1)	 Upon receipt of a report of City Better Housing
                 inspectors, as provided in Section 21-13(4) of this
                 Code, give written notice to the owner, occupant,
                 mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons
                 having an interest in such dwelling or building, as
                 shown by the public records, ordering them to
                 appear before them on the date specified in the
                 notice or show cause why the dwelling or building
                 reported to be unfit for human habitation or a
                 dangerous building should not be repaired or
                 demolished in accordance with the statement of
                 particulars set forth in the inspector's notice
                 provided for in Section 21-13(5) of this Code.  If
                 a person notified fails to appear in person or
                 through a representative, the Commissioners shall
                 hear testimony and notify such person of its
                 decision.  The Commissioners, through their
                 chairman or vice-chairman, shall have authority to
                 issue subpoenas for witnesses and administer oaths. 
                 Any person duly served with a subpoena failing to
                 appear shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
                 punishable as such.
           
            (2)	 Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the
                 inspector or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee
                 or any other person having an interest in such
                 building, as shown by the public records, shall
                 offer relative to the dwelling or rooming house
                 being unfit for human habitation or dangerous
                 building.
           
            (3)	 Make written findings of fact from the testimony
                 offered pursuant to subsection (2) of this Section
                 as to whether or not the dwelling or rooming house
                 is unfit for human habitation or the building
                 within the terms and provisions of Section 21-14 of
                 this Code.
           
            (4)	 Issue an order, based upon the findings of fact
                 made pursuant to subsection (3) of this Section,
                 commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee,
                 agent and all other persons having an interest in
                 such dwelling, rooming house or building, as shown
                 by the public records, to repair or demolish any
                 dwelling or rooming house found to be unfit for
                 human habitation or any building found to be a
                 dangerous building within the terms and provisions
                 of this Article; provided that, any person so
                 notified shall have the privilege of either
                 repairing such dwelling, rooming house or building
                 or may demolish such dwelling, rooming house or
                 building at his own risk to prevent the acquiring
                 of a lien against the land upon which the dwelling,
                 rooming house or building stands by the City, as
                 provided in subsection (5) of this Section.
           
            (5)	 If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or agent
                 fails to comply with a lawful order provided for in
                 subsection (4) of this Section within ten (10)
                 days, the Better Housing Commissioners shall cause
                 such dwelling or rooming house or building to be
                 repaired or demolished, as the facts may warrant,
                 under the criteria provided in Section 21-15 of
                 this Code.  If after proper notice and a hearing in
                 accordance with T.C.A. A713-21-103, the Better
                 Housing Commissioners find that the structure under
                 consideration is unfit for human occupation or use,
                 they shall state in writing their findings of fact
                 in support of such determination and shall issue
                 and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
                 order:
           
                 (a)  If the repair, alteration or improvement
                      of the structure can be made at a
                      reasonable cost which is less than 50% of
                      the value of the structure, the owner
                      shall be required within the time
                      specified in the order, to repair, alter,
                      or improve such structure to render it
                      fit for human occupation or use or to
                      vacate and close the structure as a place
                      of human occupation or use.  Prior to
                      reoccupying the premises, the owner shall
                      obtain a certificate of occupancy from
                      the Better Housing Commission.  It shall
                      be illegal for any person to reoccupy a
                      structure found unfit for human
                      occupation or use without first obtaining
                      a certificate of occupancy from the
                      Better Housing Commission; or
                
                 (b)  If the repair, alteration or improvement
                      of the structure cannot be made at
                      reasonable cost which is more than 50% of
                      the value of the structure, the owner may
                      be required, within the time specified in
                      the order, to remove or demolish such
                      structure; or
                
                 (c)  That the amount of the cost of such
                      repairs, alterations or improvements, or
                      vacating and closing, or removal or
                      demolition by the Better Housing
                      Commission shall, upon the filing of a
                      notice with the Office of the Register of
                      Deeds of the county in which the property
                      lies, be assessed as a municipal lien on
                      the property in favor of the
                      municipality, second only to liens of the
                      state, county and municipality for taxes,
                      any lien of the municipality for special
                      assessments and any valid lien, right or
                      interest in such property duly recorded
                      or duly perfected by filing prior to the
                      filing of such notice in accordance with
                      T.C.A. A713-21-103(6).  This cost shall be
                      placed upon the tax rolls of the
                      municipality as a lien and shall be added
                      to the property tax bills to be collected
                      at the same time and in the same manner
                      as property taxes are collected.  If the
                      owner fails to pay the costs, they may be
                      collected at the same time and in the
                      same manner as delinquent property taxes
                      are collected and shall be subject to the
                      same penalty and interest as delinquent
                      property taxes; or
                
                 (d)  If the structure is removed or demolished
                      by the Better Housing Commission, it
                      shall sell the materials of such
                      structure and shall credit the proceeds
                      of such sale against the cost of the
                      removal or demolition, and any balance
                      remaining shall be deposited in the
                      Chancery Court by the Better Housing
                      Commission and shall be secured in such
                      manner as may be directed by that Court,
                      and shall be disbursed by that Court to
                      the person found to be entitled thereto
                      by final order of decree of such court;
                      or
                
                 (e)  The proceeds of all demolitions of
                      housing in the City of Chattanooga after
                      collection by the Back Tax Attorney shall
                      be placed in an account which shall be
                      utilized to sustain continuing demolition
                      of substandard housing in the City.
            (6)	 Report to the City Attorney the names of all
                 persons not complying with the order provided for
                 in subsection (4) of this Section.
           
            Sec. 21-10.	 Appeals from Orders of Housing Code
                         Officials.
           
            	 Where the literal application of the requirements
            of this Code would appear to cause undue hardship on an
            owner or tenant or when it is claimed the true intent
            and meaning of this Code or any regulations therein have
            been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of
            such building or structure, or his duly authorized agent
            may appeal the decision or determination of the Housing
            Code Official or Housing Inspectors to the Better
            Housing Commission.
           
            Sec. 21-11.	 Same - Appeals from Orders of Better
                         Housing Commission.
           
            	 The inspector, owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee
            and all other persons having an interest in any
            dwelling, rooming house or building, as shown by the
            public records, may appeal from any final order of the
            Better Housing Commission to the Chattanooga City
            Council by petition filed with the City Council Clerk
            within ten (10) days after the filing of the final
            order; provided that, if no petition is filed with the
            City Council Clerk within ten (10) days, the order of
            the Better Housing Commissioners shall become final.  If
            there is an appeal, the City Council shall hear the
            matter de novo.
           
            Sec. 21-12.	 Duties and Powers of Code Official and
                         Inspectors.
           
            	 The Housing Code Official and Housing Inspectors
            shall enforce all the provisions of this Code except as
            may otherwise be specifically provided for by other
            regulations.
           
            Sec. 21-13.  Duties of Housing Code Official and Housing
                         Code Inspectors.
           
            	 The duties of the Housing Code Official and Housing
            Code Inspectors shall include the following:
           
            (1)	 All housing inspectors shall have the right, upon
                 showing proper identification, to enter, examine
                 and survey at any reasonable times all dwellings,
                 dwelling units, rooming houses or rooming units
                 located within the City with permission of the
                 owner or an occupant of such structure.
           
            (2)	 If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of
                 a structure subject to the provisions of this Code
                 refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with,
                 restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to
                 any part of the structure or premises where
                 inspection authorized by this Code is sought, the
                 administrative authority may seek, in a court of
                 competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner,
                 occupant or other person in charge cease and desist
                 with such interference.  The administrative
                 authority may further obtain an order from a court
                 of competent jurisdiction to obtain access to
                 structure where the owner or occupant refuses to
                 allow an inspection of the premises if the
                 administrative authority can establish reasonable
                 suspicion satisfactory to the court for the
                 issuance of an administrative search warrant to
                 gain access to the structure without consent of the
                 owner or occupant.
           
            (3)	 All housing inspectors shall inspect any dwelling,
                 building, rooming house, wall or structure about
                 which complaints are filed by any person to the
                 effect that a dwelling, building, rooming house,
                 wall or structure is, or may be, existing in
                 violation of this article.
           
            (4)	 All housing inspectors shall inspect any dwelling,
                 building, rooming house, wall or structure
                 reported, as provided in this article by the fire
                 or police department, department of health or
                 municipal judge as probably existing in violation
                 of the provisions of this article.
           
            (5)	 The Housing Code Official shall notify, in writing,
                 the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and
                 all other persons having an interest in such
                 dwelling, building or rooming house found by a
                 housing code inspector to be a dwelling unfit for
                 human habitation or a dangerous building within the
                 standards set forth in this Code that:
           
                 (a)  The owner shall repair or demolish such
                      dwelling, rooming house or building in
                      accordance with the terms of the notice
                      of this article.
                
                 (b)  The occupant or lessee must vacate such
                      dwelling, rooming house or building, or
                      must have it repaired in accordance with
                      the notice and remain in possession.
                
                 (c)  The mortgagee, agent or other person
                      having an interest in such dwelling,
                      rooming house or building, as shown by
                      the public record may, at his own risk,
                      repair or demolish the dwelling, rooming
                      house or building or have such work or
                      act done, provided that any person
                      notified under this subsection to repair
                      or demolish any dwelling, rooming house
                      or building shall commence within a
                      reasonable time, not exceeding thirty
                      (30) days, and complete such work within
                      a reasonable length of time as may be
                      necessary to do, or have done, as
                      required by the notice provided herein.
                
                 (d)  The above time limits may be extended at
                      the discretion of the administrator or
                      his designated appointee.
                
            (6)	 The Housing Code Official and housing inspectors
                 shall set forth in the notice provided for in
                 subsection (5) of this section a description of the
                 dwelling or building or rooming house deemed
                 unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make
                 the dwelling or rooming house unfit for human
                 habitation, or the building a dangerous building
                 and an order requiring the same to be put in such
                 condition as to comply with the terms of this
                 article.
           
            (7)	 The Housing Code Official shall report to the
                 Better Housing Commissioners any noncompliance with
                 the notice provided for in subsection (5) and (6)
                 of this section.
           
            (8)	 The Housing Code Official and housing inspectors
                 shall appear at hearings conducted by the Better
                 Housing Commissioners or in any court of competent
                 jurisdiction to testify as to the condition of any
                 dwellings or rooming houses unfit for human
                 habitation, and/or dangerous buildings.
           
            (9)	 The Housing Code Official shall direct a notice to
                 be posted on all dwellings or rooming houses unfit
                 for human habitation and/or dangerous buildings
                 which shall contain the following language:
           
            	 "THIS BUILDING HAS BEEN FOUND TO BE UNFIT FOR HUMAN
                 HABITATION AND A DANGEROUS BUILDING BY THE
                 INSPECTOR.  THIS NOTICE IS TO REMAIN ON THIS
                 BUILDING UNTIL IT IS REPAIRED OR DEMOLISHED IN
                 ACCORDANCE WITH THE NOTICE WHICH HAS BEEN GIVEN THE
                 OWNER, OCCUPANT, LESSEE, MORTGAGEE OR AGENT OF THIS
                 BUILDING.  IT IS UNLAWFUL TO REMOVE THIS NOTICE
                 UNTIL SUCH NOTICE IS COMPLIED WITH."
           
           (10)	 The powers and duties conferred upon housing
                 inspectors by this article shall be in addition and
                 supplemental to the powers conferred upon the
                 inspector by any other ordinance or code provision
                 of the City.
          
            Sec. 21-14.	 Defects Constituting Unfitness or
                         Dangerousness.
           
            	 All dwellings, dwelling units and/or buildings,
            which have any or all of the following defects shall be
            deemed unfit for human habitation or shall be deemed
            dangerous buildings:
           
            (1)	 Those whose walls or other vertical members list,
                 lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line
                 suspended from the top edge of such a member shall
                 fall outside of a distance of its base equal to
                 one-third (1/3) the thickness of such member.
           
            (2)	 Those which, exclusive of the foundation, have
                 support members which have deteriorated to such an
                 extent as to be unable to safely support the
                 applied loads or which have forty (40) percent
                 damage or deterioration of the non-supporting
                 enclosing or outside walls or covering.
           
            (3)	 Those which have improperly distributed loads upon
                 the floors or roofs or in which the same are
                 overloaded or which have insufficient strength to
                 be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
           
            (4)	 Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or
                 other causes so as to have become dangerous to
                 life, safety, morals or the general health and
                 welfare of the occupants or the people of the City.
           
            (5)	 Those which have parts thereof which are so
                 attached that they may fall and injure persons or
                 property.
           
            (6)	 Those which do not have an unobstructed means of
                 egress leading to an open space at ground level.
           
            (7)	 Those which do not have the window area for each
                 habitable room equal to at least eight (8) percent
                 of the total floor area of such room.
           
            (8)	 Those which do not have ventilation provided by
                 windows equal to a minimum of 45% of the openable
                 window area size of each room, except where there
                 is supplied some device affording adequate
                 ventilation and approved by the inspector.
           
            (9)	 Those having habitable rooms with a ceiling height
                 less than seven (7) feet throughout one-half (1/2)
                 of the area of such room.  Any portion of a room
                 having a ceiling height less than five (5) feet
                 high shall not be considered in computing the total
                 floor area for such room.
           
           (10)	 Those which do not have an installed kitchen sink
                 in each dwelling unit properly connected to the hot
                 and cold potable water supply pipes and the sewer
                 system.
          
           (11)	 Those which do not have an installed tub or shower
                 and lavatory properly connected to the water pipes
                 and sewer system.
          
           (12)	 Those which do not have a flush-type water closet
                 located in a room affording privacy and properly
                 connected to the water pipes and sewer system.
          
           (13)	 Those which do not have installed electric lighting
                 facilities consisting of at least two (2) separate
                 wall type convenience outlets or one (1) ceiling
                 type fixture and one (1) wall type outlet for every
                 habitable room, to be installed in accordance with
                 the Electrical Code of the City.
          
           (14)	 Those which, where heat is not furnished from a
                 central heating plant, do not have fireproof
                 chimney flues so that heating habitable rooms can
                 be operated.  Heating equipment, whether installed
                 by the owner or occupant, must be properly vented
                 and maintained in good order and repair.
          
           (15)	 Those dwellings or buildings or rooming houses
                 existing in violation of any of the building,
                 plumbing or health codes or other ordinances or
                 codes of the City.
          
           Sec. 21-15.  Unfit, Dangerous Buildings Declared
                        Nuisances; Repair, Demolition.
          
            	 All dwellings or rooming houses unfit for human
            habitation and/or all dangerous buildings within the
            terms of Section 21-14 of this Code are hereby declared
            to be public nuisances and shall be repaired or
            demolished and debris removed from the site as provided
            in this Article.  The following criteria shall be used
            by the housing inspectors and the Better Housing
            Commissioners in ordering repair or demolition.
           
            (1)	 If the dwelling or rooming house unfit for human
                 habitation or dangerous building can reasonably be
                 repaired so that it will no longer exist in
                 violation of the terms of this Article or other
                 ordinances of the City, it shall be ordered
                 repaired.
           
            (2)	 In any case where a dwelling or rooming house unfit
                 for human habitation or a dangerous building is
                 found by the Better Housing Commission to be fifty
                 percent (50%) damaged or decayed or deteriorated,
                 it shall be demolished.  In all cases where it is
                 found by the Better Housing Commission that a
                 dwelling or a building or a rooming house cannot be
                 repaired so that it will no longer exist in
                 violation of the terms of this Article, it shall be
                 demolished.  In all cases where it is found by the
                 Better Housing Commission that a dwelling or a
                 dangerous building or rooming house is a fire
                 hazard, existing or erected in violation of the
                 provisions of this Article or any ordinance of the
                 City or statute of the state, it shall be
                 demolished.
           
            (3)	 In all cases of demolition, each structure is to be
                 completely demolished, including footings, basement
                 walls and floors at or below ground level (unless
                 otherwise specified) with all areas below ground
                 level to be completely filled in a manner to insure
                 proper drainage across the filled and unfilled
                 areas.  All wells, cisterns, septic tanks and
                 cesspools shall be properly filled to grade with
                 the existing terrain in a manner that will insure
                 proper drainage across same without causing
                 erosion.  Vegetation, with the exception of trees
                 (unless otherwise specified) will be cut to a
                 height of no more than three (3) inches and the
                 premises raked clean.
           
            Sec. 21-16.	 Posting Record of Condemnation and
                         Certificate of Occupancy.
           
            	 All structures condemned under this Code shall be
            registered in the office of the Building Official for
            the City of Chattanooga.  Any owners or interested party
            desiring to rehabilitate a structure or satisfy the
            requirements of this provision shall be required to
            secure a permit from the Building Official for the City
            of Chattanooga.  Upon satisfactory completion of the
            provisions of this Article a certificate of occupancy
            shall be issued by the Building Official.  A certificate
            of occupancy is required before renting, leasing or
            occupying a condemned structure.
           
            Sec. 21-17.	 Renting Buildings Unfit for Habitation
                         Prohibited.
           
            	 It shall be unlawful for any owner or party in
            interest of a dwelling or of a building to rent or offer
            for rent any dwelling or building or rooming unit which
            is unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation,
            defects increasing the hazard of fire, accident or other
            calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary
            facilities, and due to other conditions rendering such
            dwelling or building or rooming unit unsafe or
            unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health,
            safety or morals or otherwise inimical to the welfare of
            the residents of the city.  A certificate of occupancy
            shall be obtained from the Building Official of the City
            of Chattanooga before renting, leasing or occupying any
            condemned structure.
           
            Sec. 21-18.  Transfer of Ownership.
           
            	 It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling
            unit or structure who has received compliance order, or
            upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell,
            transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of to
            another until the provisions of the compliance order, or
            notice of violation has been complied with, or until
            such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
            mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order
            or notice of violation issued by the code official and
            shall furnish to the code official a signed and
            notarized statement from the grantee, transferee,
            mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such
            compliance order or notice of violation for making the
            corrections or repairs required by such compliance order
            or notice of violation.
           
            Sec. 21-19.  Emergency Repair or Demolition.
           
            	 In cases where it reasonably appears there is
            immediate danger to the life or safety of any person
            unless a dwelling or rooming house unfit for human
            habitation or a dangerous building as defined in this
            article is immediately repaired or demolished, the
            inspector shall place a condemnation sign in the form
            prescribed by Section 21-13(9), upon such building, and
            shall immediately report the facts to the Better Housing
            Commission and to the Chief Building Official of the
            City.  The Better Housing Commissioners and/or the Chief
            Building Official of the City shall cause the immediate
            repair or demolition of such dwelling, rooming house or
            building.  The cost of such emergency demolition by the
            City of rooming house or building shall be a lien and be
            collected, charging the cost thereof as a portion of the
            real estate taxes for the current year.
           
            Sec. 21-20.  Mailing, Posting of Notices and Orders.
           
                 In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner,
            occupant, lessee or mortgagee is absent from the City,
            all notices or orders provided for herein shall be sent
            by certified mail, return receipt requested to the last
            known address of any owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee
            and all other persons having an interest in the
            dwelling, rooming house or building, as shown by the
            public records, to the last known address of each, and a
            copy of such notice shall also be posted in a
            conspicuous place on the dwelling, rooming house or
            building to which it relates.
           
            Sec. 21-21.	 General Cleanliness, Freedom from
                         Infestation.
           
            	 It shall be the duty of an inhabitant of any
            dwelling or rooming house or occupant of any building to
            keep that portion of the property which he occupies, or
            over which he has exclusive control, clean and free from
            any accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage or
            similar matter, and free from rodent or vermin
            infestation.  If an occupant shall fail to keep his
            portion of the property clean, a housing inspector shall
            send a written notice to the occupant to abate the
            nuisance within the time specified in such notice. 
            Failure of an occupant to comply with such notice shall
            be deemed a violation of this Article and shall
            constitute a public nuisance.
           
            Sec. 21-22.  Workmanlike Construction.
           
            	 All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
            installations which are required for compliance with
            this Code shall be executed and installed in a
            workmanlike and acceptable manner so as to secure the
            results intended by this Code.
           
           
                       [21-23 through 21-25 are reserved]
           
           
            
                              ARTICLE II: PREMISES
           
            Sec. 21-26.  Grading and Drainage.
           
            	 The premises shall be graded and maintained so as
            to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon,
            or within any structure located thereon.  Stagnant water
            shall be determined as any accumulation that has not
            dispersed within seven (7) days of the last recorded
            local rainfall.
           
            Sec. 21-27.  Access Areas.
           
            	 All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and
            similar paved areas for public use shall be kept in a
            proper state of repair, free of debris and shall be
            maintained free of hazardous conditions.  If any
            sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof by virtue of its
            state of repair shall constitute a danger to public
            health and safety, the sidewalk or driveway or portion
            thereof shall be replaced.  Steps shall comply with
            the requirements for exterior stairs.
           
            Sec. 21-28.  Accessory Structures.
           
            	 Garages, storage buildings and other accessory
            structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair
            and sound structural condition.
           
            Sec. 21-29.  Closing of Vacant Structures.
           
            	 If the structure or part thereof is vacant or unfit
            for human habitation, occupancy or use and is not in
            danger of structural collapse, the Code Official may
            post a placard of condemnation on the premises and may
            order the structure closed up so it will not be an
            attractive nuisance.
           
            Sec. 21-30.  Barricading Vacant Buildings.
           
            	 Every person owning or having charge or control of
            any vacant building shall remove all combustible waste
            and refuse therefrom and lock, barricade or otherwise
            secure all windows, doors and other openings in the
            building to prohibit entry by unauthorized persons.
           
           
                       [21-31 through 21-34 are reserved]
           
           
           
                        ARTICLE III: EXTERIOR STRUCTURES
           
            Sec. 21-35.  General.
           
            	 The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in
            good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not
            to pose a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the
            occupants and so as to protect the occupants from the
            adverse effects of the environment.
           
            Sec. 21-36.  Stairs, Porches and Handrails.
           
            	 Every stair, porch, fire escape, balcony and all
            appurtenances attached thereto shall be so constructed
            as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the
            anticipated loads, and shall be maintained in sound
            condition and good repair.  Every stair, porch and fire
            escape shall be maintained free of hazardous conditions.
           
            	 Every flight of stairs which is more than three (3)
            risers high shall have a handrail on at least one side
            of the stair, and every open portion of a stair, fire
            escape, porch, landing or balcony which is more than
            thirty inches (30) above the grade below shall have
            guardrails.  Handrails shall be not less than thirty
            (30) inches nor more than thirty-four (34) inches high,
            measured vertically above the nosing of the treads. 
            Guardrails shall be not less than thirty (30) inches
            high above the floor of the porch, landing or balcony. 
            Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened
            and capable of bearing normally imposed loads and shall
            be maintained in good condition.
           
            Sec. 21-37.  Foundation Walls.
           
            	 No dwelling or building shall hereafter be
            structurally altered without providing an enclosed
            foundation, and such foundation shall be of masonry
            construction.  All foundation walls shall be maintained
            so as to carry the safe design and operating dead and
            live loads and shall be maintained plumb and free from
            open cracks and breaks, so as not to be detrimental to
            public safety and welfare.
           
            	 The space between structurally sound piers may be
            enclosed with materials other than concrete or masonry
            units providing the material are water resistant and the
            new wall is non-load bearing.
           
            Sec. 21-38.  Piers.
           
            	 Piers shall not be leaning or buckling out of plumb
            from top to bottom more than 1/3 the thickness of the
            wall.  Piers should be free of large cracks that weaken
            their bearing capacity.  Loose or missing masonry units
            and mortar shall be properly replaced.
           
            Sec. 21-39.  Basements and Crawl Spaces.
           
            	 Every basement and/or crawl space access way shall
            be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the
            entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water
            into the structure.  In every building, basement and
            crawl space shall be maintained reasonably free from
            dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or
            deterioration of the structure.
           
            Sec. 21-40.  Exterior Walls (Surfaces).
           
            	 All supporting structural members of all buildings
            shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration
            and maintained capable of safely bearing the dead and
            live loads imposed upon them.
           
            	 Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks,
            loose or rotten boards or timbers.  The exterior walls
            of all dwellings or buildings shall be substantially
            weather-tight, and shall be made impervious to the
            adverse effects of weather and shall be maintained in
            sound condition and good repair.
           
            	 All surface materials, including but not limited to
            wood composition, metal siding and masonry, shall be
            maintained weatherproof and shall be properly surface
            coated when required.
           
            Sec. 21-41.  Windows and Doors.
           
            	 Every window, exterior door and basement or cellar
            door and hatchway shall be substantially watertight and
            rodent proof, and shall be kept in sound working
            condition and working repair.  Window panes or an
            approved substitute shall be maintained without cracks
            or holes.  The window sash shall be properly fitted and
            weather-tight within the window frame. 
           
            	 Every window required for light and ventilation for
            habitable rooms shall be capable of being easily opened
            and secured in any position by the window hardware. 
            Every exterior door shall be provided with proper
            hardware and maintained in good condition, and shall fit
            reasonably well within its frame, so as to substantially
            exclude rain and wind from entering the dwelling or
            building.  All windows and doors shall be provided with
            acceptable, standard and operable locking devices.
           
            	 All dwellings, dwelling units and/or buildings
            shall have an unobstructed means of egress leading to an
            open space at ground level.
           
            	 Every dwelling unit shall have screens to
            effectively cover all openable windows and doors.  Every
            door opening to an outdoor space shall have screens and
            a self closing device; and every window opening to an
            outdoor space, used or intended to be used for
            ventilation, shall have screens.  Dwelling buildings
            containing central heating furnaces and air conditioning
            equipment for mechanical ventilation year-round are not
            required to have screens.  Window-type air conditioning
            units are not included in this exception.  Screens shall
            be fastened to removable frames and have a mesh with a
            maximum gauge of fourteen (14) by eighteen (18).
           
            Sec. 21-42.  Cornice and Eaves.
           
            	 All cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbels,
            terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative
            features shall be maintained in good repair with proper
            anchorage and in safe condition.  Exterior trim and
            similar features shall be maintained in sound condition
            and good repair.
           
            Sec. 21-43.  Gutters.
           
            	 Gutters, downspouts and/or splash blocks shall be
            required in cases where roof water drainage needs to be
            diverted away from one or more portions of the structure
            to help prevent from foundation problems and to help
            prevent from slippage as they enter or leave a dwelling.
           
            	 Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that
            creates a nuisance to owners or occupants of adjacent
            premises or that creates a public nuisance.  Existing
            gutters and downspouts shall be properly maintained. 
            All exposed metal surfaces shall be protected from the
            elements and against decay or rust by periodic
            application of weather-coating material such as paint or
            similar surface treatment.
           
            Sec. 21-44.  Roof.
           
            	 The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and not
            have defects which might admit rain.  Roof drainage
            shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing
            dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior
            portion of the building.
           
            Sec. 21-45.  Chimneys.
           
            	 All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and
            similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally
            safe, sound and in good repair.  All exposed metal
            surfaces shall be protected from the elements and
            against decay or rust by periodic application of
            weather-coating material such as paint or similar
            surface treatment.  Loose or missing mortar, stucco and
            masonry shall be properly replaced.
           
            Sec. 21-46.  Exterior Surfaces.
           
            	 All exterior wood surfaces, other than decay
            resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements
            and decay by painting or other protective covering or
            treatment.  It shall be the duty of the owner to keep
            all dwellings and buildings painted at regular intervals
            so that none of them become badly in need of a
            protective coat of paint.
           
           
                       [21-47 through 21-54 are reserved]
           
           
           
                         ARTICLE IV: INTERIOR STRUCTURE
           
            Sec. 21-55.  General.
           
            	 The interior of a structure and its equipment shall
            be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in
            a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the
            health, safety or welfare of the occupants or visitors,
            and to protect the occupants from the environment. 
            Floors, walls (including windows and doors), ceilings,
            and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in
            sound, clean and sanitary condition and shall be
            substantially rodent proof.  Peeling paint, cracked or
            loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface
            conditions shall be eliminated.
           
            Sec. 21-56.  Interior Doors.
           
            	 Every existing interior door shall fit reasonably
            well within its frame and shall be capable of being
            opened and closed by being properly and securely
            attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the
            manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
           
            	 Every interior door shall be provided with proper
            hardware, securely attached and maintained in good
            condition.  Hasp lock assemblies are not permitted on
            the exterior side of the door of habitable rooms.
           
            	 Privacy of bathrooms shall be afforded by doors
            complete with privacy hardware intended by manufacturer
            for that purpose.
           
            Sec. 21-57.  Floors.
           
            	 The supporting structural members of every building
            shall be maintained structurally sound, not showing any
            evidence of deterioration which would render them
            incapable of carrying the imposed loads.  Floors shall
            not be sagging, deflecting or buckling significantly.
           
            	 Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface
            shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
            substantially impervious to water and so as to permit
            such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary
            condition.
           
            Sec. 21-58.  Interior Walls.
           
            	 Interior walls or other members shall be maintained
            in sound condition and good repair.  They shall not
            list, lean or buckle.  The primary wall surface
            materials shall be free of cracks and holes that
            completely penetrate the wall surface material.  Wall
            surface materials including, but not limited to, gypsum
            board, plaster, baseboard, trim, etc. are to be properly
            and securely installed and finished.
           
            Sec. 21-59.  Ceilings.
           
            	 Ceilings are to be structurally sound with joists
            that are capable of carrying the loads they support. 
            They shall not be sagging, deflecting or buckling
            significantly.  The primary ceiling surface material
            shall be free of cracks and holes that completely
            penetrate the ceiling surface material.  Ceiling surface
            material including, but not limited to, gypsum board,
            plaster, trim, etc. are to be properly and securely
            installed and finished.
           
            	 Habitable (space) rooms other than kitchens,
            storage rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling
            height of not less than seven (7) feet.  Hallways,
            corridors, bathrooms, water closet rooms and kitchens
            shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7)
            feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling.
           
            	 If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling,
            the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required
            in only one-half the room area.  No portion of the room
            measuring less than five (5) feet from the finished
            floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any
            computation of the minimum room area.
           
            Sec. 21-60.  Stairs and Railings.
           
            	 All interior stairs and railings shall be
            maintained in sound condition and good repair by
            replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive wear
            or are broken, warped or loose.  Every inside stair
            shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to
            use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads.
           
            Sec. 21-61.	 Minimum Requirements for Electrical
                         Systems.
           
            (1)	 All existing electrical wiring outlets and fixtures
                 required by this Code shall be installed,
                 maintained and connected to a source of electric
                 power in accordance with the provisions of the
                 Electrical Code adopted by the City of Chattanooga.
           
            (2)	 All dwellings, dwelling units and/or buildings
                 shall have installed electric lighting facilities
                 consisting of at least two (2) separate wall type
                 convenience outlets or one (1) ceiling type fixture
                 and one (1) wall type outlet for every habitable
                 room.
           
            (3)	 Each entry door shall have a light fixture that can
                 shine light on the door at nighttime.  The light
                 must have a globe and be able to be operated by a
                 switch located just inside the door.
           
            (4)	 Unsafe and hazardous conditions in violation of the
                 Electric Code or Fire Codes adopted by the City of
                 Chattanooga shall not be allowed to exist.
           
            (5)	 All residential dwellings shall have at the minimum
                 one (1) battery operated or hard wired (electric)
                 smoke detector on each habitable floor.
           
            Sec. 21-62.  Minimum Requirements for Plumbing.
           
            (1)	 Sanitary Facilities:  All required plumbing
                 fixtures located within the dwelling unit shall
                 contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub
                 or shower and a water closet all in good working
                 condition and properly connected to an approved
                 water and sewer system.  Every plumbing fixture and
                 water and waste pipe shall be properly installed
                 and maintained in good sanitary working condition
                 free from defects, leaks and obstructions.
           
            (2)	 Location of Sanitary Facilities:  All required
                 plumbing fixtures shall be located within the
                 dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of
                 same.  The water closet, tub or shower and lavatory
                 shall be located in a room affording privacy to the
                 user and such room shall have a minimum floor space
                 of thirty (30) square feet with no dimension less
                 than four (4) feet.  Bathrooms shall be accessible
                 from habitable rooms, hallways, corridors and other
                 protected or enclosed areas, not including kitchens
                 or other food preparation areas.
           
            (3)	 Hot and Cold Water Supply:  Every dwelling unit
                 shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory
                 and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold
                 and hot water.  All water shall be supplied through
                 an approved distribution system connected to a
                 potable water supply.
           
            (4)	 Water Heating Facilities:  Every dwelling unit
                 shall have water facilities which are properly
                 installed and maintained in a safe and good working
                 condition and are capable of heating water to such
                 a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of
                 water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink,
                 lavatory basin, bathtub or shower.
           
            Sec. 21-63.  Minimum Heating Facilities.
           
            (1)	 Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities
                 which are properly installed, are maintained in
                 safe and good working conditions and are capable of
                 safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms
                 and bathrooms in every dwelling unit located
                 therein to a temperature of at least sixty-eight
                 (68) degrees F at a distance of three (3) feet
                 above floor level, under minimum winter conditions.
           
            (2)	 Where a central heating system is not provided,
                 each dwelling unit shall be provided with
                 facilities whereby heating appliances may be
                 connected.
           
            (3)	 Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited
                 except for gas heaters listed for unvented use.
           
            Sec. 21-64.  Minimum Light and Ventilation Requirements.
           
            (1)	 All spaces or rooms shall be provided sufficient
                 light so as not to endanger health and safety. 
                 Every habitable space or room shall have the window
                 area equal to at least eight (8) percent of the
                 total floor area of such space or room.
           
            (2)	 Lights in Hallways of Apartments and Rooming
                 Houses:  In every apartment and rooming house in
                 the City exceeding one (1) story, a light shall be
                 kept burning by the owner in the public hallways
                 near the stairs; upon the entrance floor and second
                 floor of such building every night from sunset to
                 sunrise and upon all other floors from sunset until
                 10:00 P.M.
           
            (3)	 Ventilation:  All spaces or rooms shall be provided
                 sufficient natural or mechanical ventilation so as
                 not to endanger health and safety.  The total of
                 openable window area in each habitable room shall
                 equal to at least forty-five percent (45%) of the
                 minimum window area size.
           
            (4)	 Bathroom:  Every bathroom shall comply with the
                 light and ventilation requirements for habitable
                 rooms except that no window or skylight shall be
                 required in adequately ventilated bathrooms
                 equipped with an approved ventilating system.
           
            Sec. 21-65.  Minimum Dwelling Space Requirements.
           
            	 The number of persons occupying any dwelling shall
            be limited by the following requirements:
           
            (1)	 Required Space in Dwelling Unit:  The total of all
                 habitable rooms in a dwelling unit shall be such as
                 to provide at least one hundred fifty (150) square
                 feet of floor space for the first occupant there
                 and at least one hundred (100) additional square
                 feet of floor space for each additional occupant
                 thereof.  Floor space shall be calculated in
                 relation to ceiling heights as specified in 21-14
                 (9) of this Code.
           
            (2)	 Required Space in Sleeping Rooms:  In every
                 dwelling unit, every room occupied for sleeping
                 purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least
                 seventy (70) square feet of floor space, and every
                 room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
                 one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50)
                 square feet of floor space for each occupant.
           
            (3)	 Occupancy of Dwelling Unit Below Grade:  No
                 basement or cellar space shall be used as a
                 habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
           
            	 (a)  The floor and walls are impervious to
                      leakage of underground and surface
                      run-off water and are insulated against
                      dampness; and
           
            	 (b)  The total window area in each room is
                      equal to at least a minimum window area
                      size as required by the Code; and
           
            	 (c)  Such required minimum window area is
                      located entirely above the grade of the
                      ground adjoining such window area; and
           
            	 (d)  The total of openable window area in each
                      room is equal to at least the minimum as
                      required under the Code except where some
                      other device affording adequate
                      ventilation is supplied.
           
            Sec. 21-66.  Extermination.
           
            	 Every occupant of a single dwelling building and
            every owner of a building containing two (2) or more
            dwelling units shall be responsible for the
            extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests
            within the building or premises.  After extermination,
            proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
            re-infestation.  The owner of any structure shall be
            responsible for extermination within the structure prior
            to renting, leasing or selling the structure.
           
            Sec. 21-67.  Requirements for Rooming Houses.
           
            	 No person shall operate a rooming house or shall
            let to another for occupancy any room unless such
            rooming house or room complies with the following
            requirements:
           
            (1)	 Every rooming house and room shall be in compliance
                 with the minimum standards set forth in Sections
                 21-14(1)-(5), (7)-(10) and (13)-(15), and Section
                 21-65 of this Code.
           
            (2)	 At least one (1) flush water closet lavatory, basin
                 and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a
                 water and sewer system and in good working
                 condition, shall be supplied for each four (4)
                 rooms within a rooming house, wherever such
                 facilities are stored.
           
            (3)	 Every flush water closet, flush urinal, tub or
                 shower required above shall be located within the
                 rooming house in rooms which:
           
            	 (a)  Afford privacy;
           
            	 (b)  Are accessible by a common hall without
                      going outside of the rooming house;
           
            	 (c)  Are accessible from a common hall without
                      going through sleeping quarters of
                      others; and
           
            	 (d)  Are located on the floor they serve
                      within the dwelling.
           
            (4)	 Rooming Unit Exit Requirements:  Every rooming unit
                 shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
                 leading to safe and open space at ground level as
                 required by the Building Code of the applicable
                 governing body.
           
            (5)	 Sanitary Conditions:  The operator of every rooming
                 house shall be responsible for the maintenance of
                 all walls, floors and ceilings, and for maintenance
                 of sanitary conditions in every other part of the
                 rooming house, and shall be further responsible for
                 the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises
                 where the entire structure or building is leased or
                 occupied by the operator.
           
            (6)	 License Requirements:  No individual or company
                 holding five (5) or more dwelling units for rent or
                 lease shall offer same without obtaining a valid
                 license as required by the City Code.
           
            (7)	 License Required:  No person shall operate a
                 rooming house unless he holds a valid rooming
                 license.
           
           
                       [21-68 through 21-75 are reserved]
           
           
           
                      
       	    	 SECTION 2.  BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, That Chattanooga
       City Code, Part II, Article II-Referral Service, Sections 21-41
       through 21-43 be and are hereby renumbered as Article V, Sections 

       21-76 through 21-78, consecutively.
       	    	 SECTION 3.  BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, That Chattanooga
       City Code, Part II, Article III-Fair Housing, Sections 21-61
       through 21-72 be and are hereby renumbered as Article VI, 
Sections
       21-81 through 21-92, consecutively.
       	    	 SECTION 4.  BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, That this Ordinance
       shall take effect two (2) weeks from and after its passage as
       required by law.
      
       PASSED on Third and Final
       Reading November 12, 1992.    
s/s_________________________________
       	    	      	   	     	         CHAIRPERSON
      
       	    	      	   	     APPROVED:_______ DISAPPROVED:_______
      
       	    	      	   	     DATE:_________________ ______, 1992.
      
      
       	    	      	   	     s/s_________________________________
       	    	      	   	     	             MAYOR
       PAN:cjc

















