Willard v. Parsons Hill Partnership (2003-494 & 2003-499); 178 Vt. 300;
882 A.2d 1213

2005 VT 69

[Filed 05-Aug-2005]


       NOTICE:  This opinion is subject to motions for reargument under
  V.R.A.P. 40 as well as formal revision before publication in the Vermont
  Reports.  Readers are requested to notify the Reporter of Decisions,
  Vermont Supreme Court, 109 State Street, Montpelier, Vermont 05609-0801 of
  any errors in order that corrections may be made before this opinion goes
  to press.


                                 2005 VT 69
  	
                         Nos. 2003-494 and 2003-499

       	
  Candace A. Willard, et al.	                 Supreme Court

                                                 On Appeal from
       v.	                                 Rutland Superior Court

  Parsons Hill Partnership, et al.	         June Term, 2005


  Brent E. Poulin, et al.

           v.	

  Parsons Hill Partnership, et al.


  Alden T. Bryan, J.

  John Paul Faignant of Miller Faignant & Behrens, P.C., Rutland, for
    Plaintiffs-Appellants Willard, et al. and Cross-Appellee Taggart 
    Brothers,Inc. (03-494).

  John J. Welch, Jr. of John J. Welch, Ltd., Rutland, for
    Plaintiffs-Appellants Poulin, et al. (03-499).

  Robert A. Mello of Robert A. Mello & Associates, PLC, South Burlington, for 
    Defendants-Appellees.


  PRESENT:  Dooley, Johnson and Skoglund, JJ., and Reiss, D.J., and
            Gibson, J. (Ret.),  Specially Assigned 

        
         1.  JOHNSON, J.  Plaintiffs sue their landlord and others for
  damages, alleging a knowing and willful breach of the common-law warranty
  of habitability.  Plaintiffs claim that landlord knowingly supplied its
  tenants with water containing levels of toxins well in excess of public
  health standards for approximately fourteen years.  Plaintiffs further
  allege that, despite a "Do Not Drink" order issued by the Department of
  Health, defendants took no action to notify tenants of the problem, or to
  fix it.  Defendants moved for summary judgment, arguing that plaintiffs'
  claims under the common law were preempted by statute, and that,
  notwithstanding plaintiffs' allegation of lack of knowledge, plaintiffs
  could not satisfy the elements of the statutory cause of action because no
  tenants had notified landlord of the breach.  To the extent that there was
  notification, defendants argued that the water system was fixed in a timely
  manner following receipt of the  written notice from some of the tenants. 
  In addition, the individual partners of the landlord argued that they were
  not proper parties to plaintiffs' suit.  Defendants also cross-claimed
  against a contractor under an express indemnity agreement related to work
  the contractor performed on the water system that was eventually identified
  as the source of the contamination.  The trial court granted summary
  judgment for all defendants, and dismissed defendants' cross-claim.  We
  reverse and remand on plaintiffs' claim under the common law, and hold that
  it is not preempted by a statute that is addressed solely to patent defects
  that tenants are capable of discovering.   We affirm the trial court's
  judgment on the cross-claim.

         2.  In 1982, a group of individuals formed defendant Parsons Hill
  Partnership, a limited partnership organized under Vermont law, for the
  purposes of developing low-income family housing in Castleton, Vermont. 
  Yvonne Rooney was named the general partner.  Later that year, the
  partnership obtained state approval to construct the project and to operate
  a water system to provide water to the housing units.
   
         3.  Vermont Department of Health water tests conducted at the
  project in early 1983 revealed that the water contained unsafe levels of
  Perchloroethylene (PCE)-a known toxin.  The tests showed PCE levels at 790
  parts per billion (ppb)-levels well in excess of the Environmental
  Protection Agency's maximum contaminant level of 20 ppb.  Based on these
  results, the Department of Health assigned the water "No Drink" status. 
  After being notified verbally, Yvonne Rooney received written confirmation
  of these results from the State.  The letter requested that the tenants be
  notified of the water's unsafe status.  Despite this request, tenants
  allege that neither Yvonne Rooney, nor anyone associated with or employed
  by the partnership took any action to warn the tenants or to furnish them
  with uncontaminated water prior to August 1997.

         4.  Tenants contend that they drank, bathed in, cooked with, and
  cleaned with the PCE contaminated water for fourteen years until one of
  them inadvertently learned of the problem in July 1997.  While conducting
  internet research as part of her employment, tenant Candace Willard
  discovered information on a state web site indicating that the water at
  Parsons Hill was contaminated with PCE.  After doing further research on
  the potentially dire health consequences associated with PCE exposure,
  Willard informed other tenants of her findings and they hired a consultant
  and an attorney.
   
         5.  On August 11, 1997, counsel for eight tenant families sent a
  letter to counsel for Parsons Hill Partnership to provide "notice under 9
  V.S.A. Section 4458 that Parsons Hill Partnership and Yvonne Rooney are in
  breach of their obligations for habitability with regard to the water at
  the Parsons Hill apartments."  Section 4458 is the warranty-of-habitability
  enforcement provision in the Residential Rental Agreements Act. (FN1)  
  Apparently in response to the tenants' concerns, the State brought a
  temporary water system to Parsons Hill to provide the tenants with
  contaminant-free drinking and cooking water.

         6.  The following month, the eight tenant families who sent the
  partnership notice under the statute, along with a number of other tenant
  families, filed a complaint for damages against various individual
  partners, corporations, and the partnership.  Among other things, their
  complaint alleged that the partnership violated the common-law warranty of
  habitability by failing to remedy the water contamination within a
  reasonable time after first receiving the State's notice describing the
  problem in 1983.  Despite having referenced the statute in their notice
  letter, the tenants did not assert a statutory claim.  Specifically, they
  alleged that the water contamination that the partnership and its
  individual partners failed to remedy for approximately fourteen years was a
  habitability defect that the tenants were incapable of discovering because
  of its latent nature and its origin in a facility controlled and operated
  by the partnership.  
   
         7.  Plaintiffs' complaint alleged that for fourteen years,
  several state officials had been working with Yvonne Rooney, as well as
  Catherine and William Rooney-who were limited partners and were also at
  various times operators of the water system-to ascertain the source of the
  PCE contamination.  Plaintiffs further allege that levels of contamination
  had fluctuated over that period, but had regularly exceeded safe levels. 
  During that same period, the State sent numerous letters to, or otherwise
  communicated with, Yvonne, Catherine, and William Rooney informing them
  that tests continued to show PCE contamination in the water and reminding
  them that the "Do Not Drink" water advisory should remain in place until
  the State changed that status.  Despite these directives, the tenants
  allege that, prior to August 1997, defendants neither notified them of the
  problem nor took any steps to furnish uncontaminated water to the tenants'
  rental units.

         8.  After years of investigation, the State, in conjunction with
  the partnership and the Rooneys, identified the PCE contamination's source
  as an underground storage tank that was part of the water system operated
  by the Rooneys.  Shortly thereafter, in October 1997, the defective tank
  was disconnected and replaced.

         9.  Plaintiffs conducted extensive discovery and reached a
  settlement with numerous defendants on all counts except the
  warranty-of-habitability count against the partnership and the Rooneys. 
  These remaining defendants then moved for summary judgment.  In considering
  the motion, the trial court refused to recognize the viability of the
  tenants' common-law claim, and instead applied the statute with its
  tenant-notice provision,  4458(a).  Because of its decision to apply the
  statute, the trial court divided the otherwise similarly-situated
  plaintiffs into two groups: those who sent the partnership the statutory
  notice letter before initiating this lawsuit, and those who did not.  For
  purposes of convenience, we will identify the notice group as the
  "Willards" and the nonnotice group as the "Poulins." (FN2)   
   
         10.  The trial court applied the statute to both tenant groups,
  concluding that the Legislature had preempted the common-law habitability
  remedy by passing  4458.  Notwithstanding the fact that defendants had
  received several written notices of the water problem from the State over a
  fourteen-year period, the trial court ruled that the Poulins' failure to
  give the partnership written notice of the alleged habitability defect
  pursuant to  4458 barred their claim.  The court stated that
  "[h]abitability issues only become relevant when the defects, patent or
  latent, come to light," regardless of how long the landlords had known of
  and failed to repair them, apparently concluding that notice from the State
  to the partnership was not sufficient to bring the defect "to light."
   
         11.  Even though the Willards also brought their claim under the
  common law, the trial court credited them for complying with the statute's
  notice requirement.  Nonetheless, the court concluded that they could not
  prevail because they could not show that defendants "fail[ed] to make
  repairs within a reasonable time," or that the contaminated water system
  "materially affect[ed] the health and safety" of the tenants.  The court
  based its conclusions on its view that the reasonable time in which
  defendants were required to make repairs was measured from August 1997 when
  the Willards gave written notice of the water defect, instead of 1983 when
  Yvonne Rooney received written notice of the PCE contamination from the
  Department of Health.  The court concluded that defendants had remedied the
  habitability defect within a reasonable time because the undisputed facts
  showed that, within weeks of the Willards' letter, the State "was promptly
  on the scene with a . . . [water tank] for drinking and cooking water."  In
  light of the short period between the tenants' notice letter and
  defendants' remedial action, the court concluded that "it cannot be said
  that the contaminated water system 'materially affect[ed] health and
  safety,' " even though plaintiffs alleged that they had been drinking
  PCE-contaminated water for many years. 

         12.  We review a trial court's grant of summary judgment de novo. 
  In so doing, we apply the same standard as the trial court, granting
  summary judgment if there are no genuine issues as to any material fact,
  and any party is entitled to summary judgment as a matter of law.  V.R.C.P.
  56(c)(3).  Our review of legal questions presented by the motion is plenary
  and nondeferential.  

                        I.  Warranty of Habitability

         13.  The principal issue is whether plaintiffs may rely on the
  common-law implied warranty of habitability we recognized in Hilder v. St.
  Peter, 144 Vt. 150, 478 A.2d 202 (1984), or whether the common law as
  stated therein was preempted by the Legislature's enactment of the
  Residential Rental Agreements Act, 9 V.S.A. ㎣ 4451-4468.  We agree with
  plaintiffs that the statute as originally enacted covered only patent
  defects, and that to apply its notice provisions to bar plaintiffs' claim
  based on latent defects is illogical.  Moreover, there is no evidence in
  the statute or legislative history that the Legislature intended to change
  the common-law with respect to latent defects, or to preempt that law as
  stated in Hilder.
   
         14.  In Hilder, we concluded that changes in the historical
  relationship between landlords and tenants necessitated the adoption of an
  implied requirement, in every residential rental agreement, that the
  landlord maintain premises that are at all times safe, clean, and fit for
  human habitation.  144 Vt. at 159, 478 A.2d at 208.  We recognized that
  because of their greater familiarity with the rental units they own and the
  essential equipment attached to those units, landlords were in a superior
  position to discover and cure any defects that would affect the safety and
  fitness for human habitation of their units.  Id. at 158, 478 A.2d at 207. 
  We stressed that the warranty of habitability covers all latent and patent
  defects in the unit's essential facilities, i.e., those that are vital to
  residential life.  Id. at 160, 478 A.2d at 208.  This warranty extends to
  facilities that are controlled by the landlord, including those that are
  located in common areas.  Id. at 160 n.2, 478 A.2d at 208 n.2.

         15.  Under Hilder, a complaining tenant has to notify the landlord
  of the habitability defect and allow a reasonable time for the landlord to
  correct it prior to suing the landlord for breach of the implied warranty. 
  Id. at 161, 478 A.2d at 209.  The notice requirement applies, however, only
  to defects "not known to the landlord."  Id. (quotations omitted).  Thus,
  Hilder permitted suits for warranty breaches resulting from unrepaired or
  uncorrected defects that the landlord actually knew of, either (1) because
  an affected tenant had complained to the landlord about the problem, or (2)
  because of the landlord's superior familiarity with, access to, or control
  over the essential facility where the defect existed.  Plaintiffs'
  allegations, beginning in 1983, fit squarely into the second category.

         16.  In 1986, partly in response to Hilder, the Legislature enacted
  the Residential Rental Agreements Act (RRAA), 1985, No. 175 (Adj. Sess.), 
  1, in which it expressed its desire to protect the State's tenant
  population from unscrupulous and recalcitrant landlords, while striking a
  fair balance between the rights of landlords and tenants.  See Hearing on
  H.339 Before House Judiciary Comm. 40-43, 1985 Bien. Sess. (Vt. Aug. 21,
  1985) (discussing Hilder in the context of then-pending
  warranty-of-habitability legislation); see also Vt. Tenants, Inc. v. Vt.
  Hous. Fin. Agency, 170 Vt. 77, 86, 742 A.2d 745, 751 (1999) (recognizing
  that RRAA has both tenant-protection and landlord-protection provisions).  
   
         17.  The RRAA, like the common law, implies a warranty of
  habitability in all residential  rental agreements.  9 V.S.A.  4457. 
  Section 4458(a) requires the tenant to give the landlord "actual notice" of
  the landlord's noncompliance with its habitability obligations before
  resorting to the remedies provided by the statute.  Actual notice is 
  defined as written notice hand-delivered or mailed to the landlord's last
  known address.  Id.  4451(1).

         18.  Although the RRAA does not make any distinction between patent
  and latent defects, its notice provisions can be logically understood to
  apply only to patent defects.  The notice provision plays an important role
  in safeguarding the landlord's rights in cases involving patent defects. 
  These are defects that the tenant is most often in a superior position to
  discover because of his or her daily use and occupancy of the rented
  premises-especially if the habitability defect occurs inside an individual
  rental unit.  Examples of such defects include a chronically clogged
  toilet, leaking or frozen pipes, vermin infestation, lack of heat, and
  crumbling plaster.  See Hilder, 144 Vt. at 155-56, 478 A.2d at 206
  (cataloguing defects on which tenant based successful
  warranty-of-habitability claim).  As a practical matter, most landlords do
  not frequently enter occupied rental units unless they are responding to a
  tenant's complaint.  See 9 V.S.A.  4460 (establishing notice and consent
  requirements that landlord must satisfy before entering tenant's dwelling). 
  In such cases, the landlord must often rely on notice from a tenant to
  learn that there is a problem that may materially affect tenant health and
  safety; these are the cases that present the greatest danger of abuse by
  dishonest tenants.  
   
         19.  The statute's notice requirement is designed to ensure that a
  landlord is not penalized for failing to fix a problem of which landlord
  had no knowledge.   For example, it prevents tenants from using a
  subsequently occurring habitability defect as an excuse for nonpayment of
  rent that is wholly unrelated to the defect and that began before the
  defect arose.  See id.  4458(a)(1) (allowing for withholding of rent by
  tenant during period of landlord's noncompliance).

         20.  By contrast, the provision requiring notice from the tenant
  serves no similarly important or logical purpose in cases involving latent
  defects of which the landlord had written notice from someone other than
  the tenant. In such cases, the statute's notice of noncompliance provision
  is nothing more than a notice-of-suit requirement.  The trial court's
  attempt to apply the notice provision to this case illustrates the point. 
  The trial court ruled that the Willards' pre-suit notice satisfied the
  statute, and their claim was not, therefore, barred on notice grounds like
  the Poulins' claim.  The notice, sent by the Willards' attorney to the
  partnership's attorney, indicated that it was directed to the partnership
  and general partner Yvonne Rooney, stated that it was sent on behalf of
  eight tenant families at Parsons Hill, and requested the recipient to
  "accept this notice under 9 V.S.A. Section 4458 that the Parsons Hill
  Partnership and Yvonne Rooney are in breach of their obligations for
  habitability with regard to the water at the Parsons Hill apartments."  The
  letter makes no attempt to explain the exact nature of the water problem.
   
         21.  No explanation was needed because the partnership and its
  general partner had known since 1983 that PCE contamination was the
  problem, even if the origin of the PCE was still unknown.  The record here
  contains numerous examples of written notice of the water problem sent by
  the State to general partner Yvonne Rooney.  Applying the notice provision,
  as the trial court did,  in this ritualistic manner does nothing to further
  the statute's purpose-protecting law-abiding landlords.  Similarly,
  imposing a notice requirement in a latent defect case where the landlord
  already knows what the problem is serves no purpose.  Therefore, it is
  apparent that the law was directed only at patent defects.  To construe the
  statute otherwise would lead to a patently absurd result.

         22.  The legislative debate on the habitability sections in the
  RRAA supports our assessment that the Legislature's focus was on patent
  habitability defects.  After its introduction in the Vermont House of
  Representatives, the RRAA bill, H.339, was ultimately referred to the House
  Judiciary Committee.  H. Jour. 208, 1985-1986 Gen. Assem., Adj. Sess. (Vt.
  Feb. 26, 1986).  The Judiciary Committee struck all the original provisions
  of the bill, except for the enacting clause, and substituted its own
  amended version of the bill.  Id.  The section of the committee's amended
  bill dealing with tenant remedies in the event of habitability breaches is
  identical to the final version of the RRAA.  Compare id. at 210 with 9
  V.S.A.  4458.  The following exchange is a representative sample of the
  committee's discussion:

    REP. BATTEN: [I]t would seem that after Hilder vs. St. Peter, many
    tenants are using that decision to just move in and not pay rent
    and claim it is because the premises are defective and the owner
    won't do anything about it.  I wonder if there should be some
    burden placed on the tenant that there be some notification of the
    deficiency - say the heat has gone off, that that tenant should
    have the burden of notify[ing] the landlord prior to nonpayment of
    rent.

    MS. ANCEL: That is required in the [Hilder] case.  And, it's also
    required in the bill.

    REP. BATTEN: . . . And, I think people - they haven't paid rent
    and the landlord starts eviction proceeding and suddenly hears
    about the fact that the tenant hasn't had hot water for seven
    months and the landlord hasn't heard this. 

    REP. STOKES: Then it doesn't apply, even according to the [C]ourt,
    the Hilder vs. St. Peter case.  Notification is part of the
    process.

    REP. BATTEN: So, what is the process of notification?

    REP. STOKES: It just says that the tenant must notify the landlord
    and if the landlord does not respond in a reasonable amount of
    time, that's what the case says, reasonable amount of time, then
    the tenant may withhold rent
    .   
  Hearing on H.339 Before House Judiciary Comm. 40-41, 1985-1986 Bien. Sess.
  (Vt. Aug. 21, 1985).  Later in the discussion, Representative Davenport, a
  principal author of the original version of H.339 and a member of the
  Judiciary Committee, added additional comments that are consistent with our
  appraisal of the Legislature's intent:

    REP. DAVENPORT: I have to say on the issues of repair and
    deduction and rent withholding I have somewhat ambivalent
    feelings.  On the one hand the same feelings that I had about the
    security deposit that it is important to have a process that
    people know about and understand about and somehow if you put that
    in statute that's somehow easier for people to get at and have
    access to then it's in the case law, which was Anne's point about
    people now they hear about [Hilder v. St. Peter] and they think it
    is something they could apply to their situation but they don't
    have access to this case.  The notice provision isn't something
    they know about.  So, that's one of the reasons why it seemed to
    me initially when we were drafting this bill that there was a real
    value to putting some of this into statute.  My feeling on the
    other hand is that putting it into statute does make this bill
    very long and does make it very cumbersome.  And, that there may
    also be value to leave it alone in the case law having a finding
    that we are not dealing with that one way or the other. . . .

  Id. at 43.  
   
         23.  Ultimately, the Legislature did adopt a warranty of
  habitability provision that was, in virtually all respects, consistent with
  that part of Hilder that deals with patent defects known to the tenant.  In
  fact, since the statute's enactment we have cited to Hilder as a guide to
  the statute's proper interpretation in cases involving patent habitability
  defects.  Favreau v. Miller, 156 Vt. 222, 229, 591 A.2d 68, 72-73 (1991)
  (citing Hilder); Nepveu v. Rau, 155 Vt. 373, 375, 583 A.2d 1273, 1274
  (1990) (citing Hilder).  The committee's focus was not, however, on the
  aspect of Hilder allowing for tenant remedies in cases involving latent
  defects already known to the landlord.  This oversight is understandable
  because, while the latent defect language in the case was important to the
  common law that we were promulgating, Hilder itself was a case involving
  patent defects.

         24.  We note that, in 2000, the Legislature amended 9 V.S.A. 
  4458(a).  1999, No. 115 (Adj. Sess.),  6.  The statute now provides that a
  tenant can pursue his habitability remedies if the landlord fails to remedy
  a habitability defect within a reasonable time "after receiving actual
  notice of the noncompliance from the tenant, a governmental entity or a
  qualified independent inspector."  9 V.S.A.  4458(a).  With this
  amendment, the Legislature has now brought cases like plaintiffs' within
  the ambit of the statute, thus supporting our view that the former 
  4458(a) did not cover the entire range of habitability claims.  
   
         25.  We are not persuaded by defendants' argument that the
  statutory notice provision's "obvious purpose" is to "assure that the
  landlord is aware that the tenant considers a condition in the premises to
  constitute a breach of the warranty of habitability and intends to hold the
  landlord accountable in damages if the problem is not corrected in a
  reasonable time."  In defendants' view, a landlord may . . . be aware of a
  contaminant in the water supply but may nevertheless believe that the
  premises are perfectly habitable because the levels of contamination are
  low, or because the state officials are aware of the contaminant and have
  permitted continued occupancy and use of the water."  The warranty of
  habitability does not, however, cover minor defects that an ordinary person
  would grudgingly tolerate or those that a government entity in charge of
  public health would allow to persist without taking some action to protect
  the residents.  Instead, it covers those defects that materially affect
  health and safety.  9 V.S.A.  4458(a); Hilder, 144 Vt. at 160-61, 478 A.2d
  at 208-09.  When, as here, the State's health department has established
  standards for safe levels of a contaminant in the residential water supply,
  has notified the landlord in writing that water in her building exceeds
  those levels, has imposed a "Do Not Drink" advisory for that water, and has
  relied on the landlord to notify the tenants and to make reasonable
  accommodations for a substitute water supply, the landlord has received all
  the notice the landlord is due.  Additional notice from a tenant prior to a
  lawsuit by that tenant is of little value at that point, and we cannot
  agree that the Legislature intended to impose such a requirement in cases
  like this one.
   
         26.  We have observed, however, that the RRAA's overriding
  purpose was to codify the common-law relationship between landlords and
  tenants.  Vt. Tenants, Inc., 170 Vt. at 86, 742 A.2d at 751.  Nonetheless,
  because we conclude that the statutory notice provision's manifest purpose
  is to ensure that landlords are not held liable for contract damages
  because of breaches of the warranty of habitability of which they were
  unaware, and thus had no opportunity to timely cure, we see no evidence of
  any legislative intent to preempt or change the common law on latent
  defects.   Accordingly, we interpret the statute to achieve balance between
  tenant and landlord protections, leaving undisturbed consistent common-law
  rights that existed in habitability situations not clearly governed by the
  statute.  See Estate of Kelley v. Moguls, Inc., 160 Vt. 531, 533, 632 A.2d
  360, 362 (1993) (permitting common-law negligence action where not
  expressly foreclosed by Dram Shop Act, and where legislative history
  supports view that Legislature did not intend to preempt it); Klittner v.
  Steiner, 158 Vt. 654, 655, 610 A.2d 149, 150 (1992) (mem.) (recognizing
  that where statute does not expressly foreclose a common-law cause of
  action, the common law lying outside the scope of a statute survives); cf.
  Vt. Tenants, Inc., 170 Vt. at 84-85, 742 A.2d at 750 (recognizing that
  where Legislature could have explicitly drafted RRAA to deal with mortgagee
  taking title under strict foreclosure, but failed to do so, Court
  interprets Legislature's silence as indication that it did not intend to
  cover situation, particularly where application of statute would modify
  substantive common-law rights of mortgagee in many cases).  

         27.  In sum, at common law, the warranty of habitability covered
  all patent and latent defects.  The statute cannot be applied to this case
  involving a latent defect because its enforcement provisions appear
  tailored only for cases based on patent defects.  Specifically, the notice
  provision, which serves an obvious and important purpose of protecting
  landlord rights in patent habitability defect cases, has no discernible
  purpose in latent defect cases where landlords already have actual written
  notice of a habitability problem from someone other than a tenant.  In
  light of this disparity, and of the fact that the RRAA contains no express
  language signifying that it was meant to apply to latent habitability
  defect cases, we conclude that the RRAA's enactment did not preempt
  common-law warranty of habitability actions involving latent defects of
  which a landlord already had actual knowledge.  The common-law warranty of
  habitability against latent defects remained viable at the time that
  plaintiffs filed this case; thus, Hilder v. St. Peter, and not  4458,
  controls.

         28.  We must also reject the trial court's conclusion that
  defendants fixed the problem within a reasonable amount of time.  The
  court's error on this issue follows from its conclusion that notice from
  the tenants was required here.  We have clarified that the relevant notice
  was that given by the State when it first notified Yvonne Rooney of the
  water's "Do Not Drink" status.  Therefore, we think that the summary
  judgment record supports plaintiffs' contention that  the partnership
  failed to remedy the habitability defect within a reasonable time after
  receiving the relevant notice. 
   
         29.  In all other respects, we conclude that, for summary judgment
  purposes, plaintiffs have alleged and sufficiently supported a claim for a
  common-law breach of the warranty of habitability.  A landlord's failure to
  comply with applicable housing code regulations can result in a breach of
  the warranty of habitability.  9 V.S.A.  4457; see also Hilder, 144 Vt. at
  160, 478 A.2d at 208-09 (declaring that violation of housing code provision
  related to tenant health and safety may be prima facie evidence of breach
  of the warranty of habitability).  The state and federal governments
  established standards regulating the amount of PCE that drinking water may
  contain before it becomes unsafe for human consumption.  Here, the
  Department of Health repeatedly issued "Do Not Drink" advisories over a
  fourteen-year period because the water that the partnership was providing
  to its tenants regularly failed to meet those standards.  Accordingly, as
  the trial court stated, "[i]t is obvious in this case that failure to
  provide potable water to a housing project would be a breach of the implied
  warranty of habitability." 

         30.  Finally, we are unpersuaded by the trial court's view, shared
  by the dissent, that the  tort remedies potentially available to the
  tenants for any personal injuries suffered before they learned that the
  water was contaminated are a sufficient substitute for their common-law
  warranty-of-habitability action.  The warranty of habitability is an
  implied part of every residential lease contract, 9 V.S.A.  4457; Hilder,
  144 Vt. at 159-61, 478 A.2d at 208-09, and actions for its breach sound in
  contract,  id.  As with any breach-of-contract action, a tenant prevails by
  showing he received less than he bargained for because of a defendant's
  breach.  In residential lease contracts, a plaintiff's damages are
  calculated by determining the difference in value between the agreed-upon
  rent for his unit in habitable condition, and the value of the same unit
  with habitability defects.  Favreau, 156 Vt. at 229, 591 A.2d at 73.  
   
         31.  In Favreau, we distinguished this recovery from a recovery
  for personal injuries under a negligence theory, recognizing that the law
  of negligence involves more difficult questions of causation and comes into
  play only when, as here, a plaintiff has sustained a personal injury.  Id.
  at 230, 591 A.2d at 73.  These causation issues can be especially difficult
  when, as in this case, the alleged source of the injury is an invisible
  toxin whose effects may take years to manifest.  Favreau makes clear that a
  tenant may bring both a contract action for the breach of the warranty of
  habitability and a negligence action arising from personal injuries
  allegedly suffered as a result of unsafe conditions on the premises;  the
  two actions provide different remedies for different wrongs.  Id.  We
  cannot agree, therefore, that the Legislature intended to deprive tenants
  like the Willards and the Poulins of their contract remedy solely because
  their landlord had succeeded for so long in concealing its own contractual
  breach.  But this is the effect of the trial court's holding.

         32.  Similarly, the fact that plaintiffs might also have remedies
  under the general consumer fraud statute for defendants' pre-notice conduct
  does not justify interpreting and applying the RRAA in a way that denies
  plaintiffs a remedy for what even the trial court recognized would be, if
  proven,  defendants' clear breach of a landlord's warranty obligations.  In
  Bisson v. Ward, we held that actions under the Consumer Fraud Act and the
  RRAA are "separate and distinct claims." 160 Vt. 343, 350, 628 A.2d 1256,
  1261 (1993).  There, we allowed a plaintiff tenant to pursue both a
  consumer fraud action and a warranty-of-habitability action against her
  landlords.  Id.  (FN3) 
   
                         II.  Partnership Liability

         33.  Plaintiffs also assign error to the trial court's conclusion
  that the individual Rooney defendants could not be held liable for any
  breach of the partnership's obligations because the Rooneys were not the
  tenants' landlords.  Plaintiffs do not dispute that Parsons Hill
  Partnership was their landlord, and that the Rooneys were not. 
  Nonetheless, they contend that the laws of limited partnership in effect at
  the time they filed suit allow for them to sue the general partner and any
  limited partners who have participated unduly in the control of the
  partnership. Without citation to authority, defendants argue that
  plaintiffs were required to assert their cause of action under partnership
  law.  The trial court granted summary judgment for the Rooneys after
  concluding that they could not be held liable for the partnership's breach
  because they were, "[a]t best," agents of the landlord. 

         34.  Our review of Vermont's limited-partnership law reveals no
  obstacle to plaintiffs' suit against the individual Rooney defendants. 
  Moreover, the court erred in attempting, on summary judgment, to resolve
  disputed issues of fact surrounding the Rooneys' respective roles in the
  partnership.  Thus, we reverse the trial court's grant of summary judgment
  in favor of the Rooney defendants.
   
         35.  Defendant Parsons Hill Partnership was organized under
  Vermont law in 1982.  At that time and all times afterwards, Yvonne Rooney
  was the sole designated general partner.  Sometime thereafter, Catherine
  and William Rooney were admitted as limited partners.  From the time of the
  partnership's organization until approximately two years after plaintiffs
  filed the present lawsuit, Vermont limited partnerships were governed
  primarily by Title 11, chapter 11, formerly 11 V.S.A. ㎣ 1391-1420. 
  Effective January 1, 1999, the Legislature repealed this chapter and
  replaced it with Title 11, chapter 23.  1997, No. 149 (Adj. Sess.),  5. 
  We apply the relevant provisions of the former laws because they were in
  effect at the time that all the partnership activities in question took
  place.

                        A.  General Partner Liability


         36.  As general partner in Parsons Hill Partnership, Yvonne Rooney
  had, with some limitation, all the rights and powers and was subject to all
  the liability of a general partner in a partnership without limited
  partners.  11 V.S.A.  1399.  Under former 11 V.S.A.  1207(2), a partner
  in a partnership without limited partners is jointly liable for all debts
  and obligations of the partnership.  As we noted, actions for breach of the
  warranty of habitability are contract actions.  Thus, in plaintiffs'
  instant contract action, Yvonne Rooney, as general partner in a limited
  partnership, may be held jointly liable for the partnership's contract
  liability.  See Concra Corp. v. Andrus, 141 Vt. 169, 174-75, 446 A.2d 363,
  365 (1982) (holding that a partner in a partnership without limited
  partners is jointly liable for all the partnership's contract liability). 
  Furthermore, 11 V.S.A.  1416, titled "Parties to actions," provides that
  "[a] contributor, unless he is a general partner, is not a proper party to
  proceedings by or against a partnership."  (Emphasis added).  Thus, the
  statute permits a plaintiff to include a general partner as a proper party
  to proceedings against the partnership.

                        B.  Limited Partner Liability
   
         37.  Plaintiffs claim that limited partners Catherine and William
  Rooney can also be held liable as general partners because they forfeited
  the protections afforded to limited partners when they participated in the
  control of the limited partnership.  Specifically, plaintiffs allege that
  William and Catherine Rooney participated in the key conduct at issue here
  by serving as operators of the partnership's water system, by failing to
  disclose information about that water system to the tenants, and by failing
  to correct the water problem within a reasonable time.  Limited partners
  enjoy protection from personal liability to third parties flowing from
  partnership business or conduct.  11 V.S.A.  1397.  A limited partner may
  lose this protection, however, by taking part in the control of partnership
  business in a manner that exceeds the rights and powers of a limited
  partner.  Id.  In such a case, a limited partner is treated as a general
  partner subject to suit in proceedings against the partnership.  Id.; 11
  V.S.A.  1416.    

         38.  Without making any findings or reference to the applicable
  law, the trial court concluded that William and Catherine Rooney were
  agents of the landlord not subject to suit.  Conclusions of a trial court
  that are not supported by findings cannot stand.  Bisson, 160 Vt. at 350,
  628 A.2d at 1261.  Moreover, courts are not empowered to find facts on a
  summary judgment motion.  Berlin Dev. Assocs. v. Dep't of Soc. Welfare, 142
  Vt. 107, 111, 453 A.2d 397, 399 (1982).  Instead, the court's task is to
  examine the affidavits or other summary judgment evidence to determine
  whether a triable issue exists.  Id.  

         39.  Numerous summary judgment exhibits document the contact that
  William and Catherine Rooney, along with Yvonne Rooney, had with State
  water authorities and the engineer assisting with the water problem.  These
  support the inference that William and Catherine Rooney participated in the
  alleged decisions, made on behalf of the partnership, to withhold
  information about the water from the tenants while not supplying an
  alternative source of safe water, thereby contributing to the ongoing
  breach of the partnership's habitability obligation.  Affording tenants the
  benefit of all the reasonable doubts and inferences to which they are
  entitled as nonmoving parties on summary judgment review, we conclude that
  they have identified a triable question of fact regarding the extent to
  which William and Catherine Rooney participated in the control of
  partnership business.  The issue is, therefore, remanded to the trial
  court.

                           III.  Express Indemnity

         40.  Defendants cross-appeal the dismissal of their cross-claims
  for express indemnity (FN4) from Taggart Brothers, Inc., the contractor who
  constructed the water supply system that was eventually identified as the
  source of the contaminated water.  Defendants seek indemnification in the
  event that tenants prevail on their warranty-of-habitability claims.  The
  express indemnity agreement between Taggart Brothers and the partnership
  provides:

    4.18 INDEMNIFICATION

    4.18.1 To the fullest extent permitted by law, the Contractor
    shall indemnify, and hold harmless the [partnership] and the
    Architect and their agents and employees from and against all
    claims, demands, losses and expenses, including but not limited to
    attorneys' fees, arising out of or resulting from the performance
    of the Work, provided that any such claim, damage, loss or expense
    (1) is attributable to bodily injury, sickness, disease or death,
    or to injury to or destruction of tangible property (other than
    the Work itself) including the loss of use resulting therefrom,
    and (2) is caused in whole or in part by any negligent act or
    omission of the Contractor, any Subcontractor, or anyone directly
    or indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any
    of them may be liable, regardless of whether or not it is caused
    in part by a party indemnified hereunder.

  (Emphasis added.)  According to the agreement's terms, Taggart Brothers, as
  indemnitor, must pay defendants-indemnitees only for those claims, demands,
  losses, and expenses "caused in whole or in part" by Taggart Brothers'
  negligent act or omission.  The trial court concluded that plaintiffs'
  common-law warranty of habitability claims fall outside of this provision's
  coverage.  We agree.

         41.  Defendants cannot use the express indemnification agreement
  to seek reimbursement for habitability damages that plaintiffs may collect
  because the injury that will be redressed by plaintiffs' claims was not
  "caused in whole or in part by any negligent act or omission" on the part
  of Taggart Brothers.  In this case, defendants' liability for breach of the
  common-law warranty of habitability will attach only if plaintiffs can
  prove that the partnership failed to remedy the water problem within a
  reasonable time after receiving notice of the contamination from the State. 
  Whether Taggart Brothers' negligence caused the contamination in the first
  place is irrelevant to the warranty-of-habitability liability
  determination.  A tenant is not automatically entitled to habitability
  damages the instant a defect arises; such damages are available only upon a
  landlord's knowing failure to timely remedy the defect.  

         42.  Any money that the partnership must pay out to plaintiffs as a
  result of the claim before us will be attributable exclusively to its own
  failings.  Taggart Brothers had no control over defendants' decision not to
  remedy the water contamination sooner than they did.  As the trial court
  correctly stated, "only the landlords could breach the warranty of
  habitability." (FN5)  Accordingly, we affirm.
                       
       The grant of summary judgment in favor of Parsons Hill Partnership,
  Yvonne Rooney, William Rooney, and Catherine Rooney is reversed and
  remanded.  The dismissal of the defendants' cross-claims for
  indemnification from Taggart Brothers, Inc. is affirmed.



                                       FOR THE COURT:



                                       _______________________________________
                                       Associate Justice


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Dissenting


         43.  DOOLEY, J., dissenting.  Plaintiffs in this case seek redress
  for their landlord's failure to notify them of chemical contamination, that
  the landlord knew about, in the water serving their residences.  Although
  plaintiffs alleged a number of claims arising from the landlord's inaction,
  they decided to pursue only their warranty-of-habitability claim in the
  superior court.  Obviously sympathetic to plaintiffs' situation, the
  majority holds that the Legislature did not intend the Vermont Residential
  Rental Agreements Act (RRAA), 9 V.S.A., chapter 137, to cover latent
  defects known to the landlord.  Thus, under the majority's holding, a
  tenant may sue for breach of the common-law warranty without prior notice
  to the landlord if the defect is latent, but the tenant must follow the
  statutory prerequisites to suit for all patent defects.  I cannot join in
  the Court's decision because the statutory warranty of habitability
  supplants the common-law warranty and does not distinguish between latent
  and patent defects, and defendants' alleged conduct is fully actionable
  under a common-law tort.  Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.  
   
         44.  What distinguishes this case from any precedent on the
  interrelationship of a statutory remedy and its common-law antecedent is
  that the statute applicable in this case entirely and explicitly covers the
  situation that is before the court.  The RRAA sets out a warranty of
  habitability requiring that the landlord provide "premises that are safe,
  clean and fit for human habitation and which comply with the requirements
  of applicable building, housing and health regulations."  9 V.S.A. 
  4457(a).  The language of  4457(a) reflects the parameters of the
  common-law warranty that this Court adopted in Hilder v. St. Peter.  144
  Vt. 150, 159, 478 A.2d 202, 208 (1984) (holding that landlord warrants to
  deliver over and maintain rental premises that are safe and fit for human
  living); see also Vt. Tenants, Inc. v. Vt. Hous. Fin. Agency, 170 Vt. 77,
  86, 742 A.2d 745, 751 (1999) ("Although RRAA has tenant protection and
  landlord protection provisions, its primary purpose appears to be to codify
  the common law relationship for residential rental agreements."); State v.
  Bisson, 161 Vt. 8, 12, 632 A.2d 34, 37 (1993) (RRAA "contains the general
  law of landlord and tenant relations that is customarily applicable in any
  context").  Hilder made no distinction between latent and patent defects,
  144 Vt. at 160, 478 A.2d at 208 ("[T]he implied warranty of habitability
  covers all latent and patent defects in the essential facilities of the
  residential unit."), and neither does the statute.  By its plain meaning,
  the statute covers both.  Just as explicitly, it requires he tenant to give
  "actual notice of the noncompliance," 9 V.S.A.  4458(a), which the statute
  defines as "written notice hand-delivered or mailed to the last known
  address."  Id.  4451(1).  Again, by its plain meaning, the statutory
  warranty covers the situation before this Court.
   
         45.  Our precedents are clear that where the statutory scheme
  covers the exact situation before the court, it preempts the common law. 
  Swett v. Haig's, Inc., 164 Vt. 1, 5, 663 A.2d 930, 932 (1995); Winney v.
  Ransom & Hastings, Inc., 149 Vt. 213, 217-18, 542 A.2d 269, 271-72 (1988);
  see also Klittner v. Steiner, 158 Vt. 654, 655, 610 A.2d 149, 150 (1992)
  (mem.) (holding that when a claim falls squarely within the statute's
  language, the common-law claim does not survive).  The situation here is
  quite close to Swett, where we followed the plain meaning of the statute to
  preempt the law with respect to contribution between joint tortfeasors over
  a dissent that the holding was inconsistent with legislative intent and
  would gut the statute's protection.  164 Vt. at 5, 12-13, 663 A.2d at 932,
  936-37.  In doing so, we noted that the legislative history was "sparse and
  ambiguous."  Id. at 6, 663 A.2d at 932.  The majority opinion pays lip
  service to our case law on statutory preemption of common-law claims, but
  does not reconcile its action with that precedent. 

         46.  Notwithstanding the Legislature's adoption of the common-law
  warranty of habitability in toto, the majority carves out a narrow and
  unspoken exception for latent defects because it believes the Legislature
  overlooked the issue.  See ante,  23 ("This oversight is understandable .
  . . .").  It draws that conclusion from committee discussion on patent, but
  not latent, defects.  See ante,  22.  Ultimately, the majority concludes
  that requiring notice for latent defects "serves no similarly important or
  logical purpose."  Id.  20.  In my view, the majority's rationale involves
  imperfections that often inhere in legislation.  The Legislature rarely
  predicts every eventuality and covers it in the resulting legislation.  See
  Colwell v. Allstate Ins. Co., 2003 VT 5, 떰 10-15, 175 Vt. 61, 819 A.2d 727
  (construing a statute according to its express terms even though
  legislative history suggested that the Legislature overlooked the statute's
  application in one particular context).  In responding to concerns of
  landlords, the drafting committee may well have gone further than necessary
  to protect their legitimate interest.  These imperfections are not grounds
  for refusing to apply a clear legislative requirement, however much we may
  disagree with it.  In my view, the Legislature's inattention to the
  question of latent defects, and the RRAA's consequent imperfection as it
  relates to those defects, cannot justify the majority's interpretation of
  the statutory scheme. 
   
         47.  There is a much more obvious reason why the Legislature would
  construct a warranty-of-habitability scheme without distinguishing between
  latent and patent defects, and that reason involves an appropriate
  interaction between the statute and the common law.  In this case,
  plaintiffs seek damages for the anguish they have suffered since
  discovering that, without any prior warning, they exposed themselves and
  their children to a dangerous chemical whose future health effects are
  unknown.  Plaintiffs did not need either a common-law or statutory warranty
  of habitability to bring this claim.  Defendants' failure to disclose the
  water contamination is actionable under a long-recognized exception to the
  caveat lessee doctrine.  Thus, plaintiffs' inability to recover is created
  not by the notice provisions of the RRAA, but instead by their choice of
  liability theory. 
   
         48.  Before the adoption of the implied warranty of habitability
  in residential rental agreements, the common law recognized the harshness
  of the caveat lessee doctrine with respect to latent defects known to the
  landlord.  R. Schoshinski, American Law of Landlord and Tenant  3:12
  (1980).  An exception to the doctrine emerged that made a landlord liable
  for latent defects that the landlord knew about at the time of the tenant's
  entry, but failed to disclose to the tenant.  Id.; 1 H. Tiffany, The Law of
  Landlord and Tenant  86, at 562 (1910); 1 J. Taylor, The American Law of
  Landlord and Tenant  382, at 482 (9th ed. 1904).  The landlord's liability
  arose from his silence about the latent defect because the landlord owed no
  duty to repair the premise under the common law.   Maywood v. Logan, 43
  N.W. 1052, 1053 (Mich. 1889); Steefel v. Rothschild, 72 N.E. 112, 114 (N.Y.
  1904); Tucker v. Hayford, 75 P.3d 980, 984 (Wash. Ct. App. 2003); see also
  Schoshinski, supra  3:12, at 111 (discussing various remedies for
  landlord's nondisclosure of dangerous and known latent defect the tenant is
  not likely to discover).  For example, a landlord's failure to disclose
  water contamination to his tenants stated a common-law cause of action
  under this theory in a Washington case.  Tucker, 75 P.3d at 984.  In that
  case, the landlord was aware of the water contamination and the need to
  test the water system periodically.  The tenants were unaware of the
  contamination, and they later became ill from it after consuming the water. 
  The Tucker court explained that, although the common law did not require
  the landlord to discover or repair obscure defects existing when the tenant
  takes possession, the landlord is liable for not disclosing " 'known
  dangers which are not likely to be discovered by the tenant.' "  Id.
  (quoting Aspon v. Loomis, 816 P.2d 751, 756 (Wash. Ct. App. 1991)).  The
  court sent the case back for trial on the common-law failure-to-disclose
  claim, as well as other claims, including a breach of the implied warranty
  of habitability.
   
         49.  The result in this case is that plaintiffs are, in effect,
  getting double liability from the same theory.  Plaintiffs were fully aware
  that negligent failure to disclose a latent defect known to the landlord
  was actionable, and in each of the three complaints they filed, they pled
  this cause of action.  By the third amended complaint, they had reached the
  point, however, that the proliferation of defendants and causes of actions,
  leading in turn to cross-claims and third-party claims, was seriously
  slowing the progress of the case.  As a result, they settled with all
  defendants except Parsons Hill Partnership and the Rooney family
  defendants.  Part of the terms of the settlement required them to amend the
  complaint to delete claims of negligent failure to disclose against the
  remaining defendants and to go forward with only claims based on "active
  fault" in the breach of the implied covenant of habitability.  The
  transcripts of the hearings and the relevant documents show that this
  decision was made because the settling defendants wanted to eliminate the
  risk that the remaining defendants could transfer liability to them on a
  theory of indemnity or contribution.  Indeed, because the final version of
  the complaint raised only a claim of breach of warranty of habitability and
  required proof of "active fault," proof that would not otherwise be
  required on a theory of breach of warranty of habitability, the trial judge
  granted summary judgment to all the settling defendants on the claims of
  the remaining defendants for indemnity.

         50.  While the terms of the settlement are not disclosed,
  plaintiffs received value for dropping their tort claim that remaining
  defendants negligently failed to disclose a latent defect known to them. 
  Now they want to assert the same theory under the rubric of implied
  warranty of habitability.  No unfairness is caused by denying plaintiffs
  this additional liability route.  They could have gone to trial against
  defendants under the common-law theory with no elements to prove beyond
  those in their current complaint.
   
         51.  The majority's illogical approach is most apparent from its
  conclusion about the 2000 amendment to 9 V.S.A.  4458(a), which allows
  notice to come from "a governmental entity or a qualified independent
  inspector."  1999, No. 115 (Adj. Sess.),  6.  The majority concludes that:
  "[w]ith this amendment, the Legislature has now brought cases like
  plaintiffs' within the ambit of the statute, thus supporting our view that
  the former  4458(a) did not cover the entire range of habitability
  claims."  Ante,  24.  Our law is that an amendment is intended to change
  the meaning of a statute unless a clarification of preexisting law is
  clearly indicated.  See State v. Thompson, 174 Vt. 172, 178, 807 A.2d 454,
  460 (2002); Tarrant v. Dep't of Taxes, 169 Vt. 189, 198, 733 A.2d 733, 740
  (1999); Jones v. Dep't of Employment Sec., 140 Vt. 552, 555, 442 A.2d 463,
  464 (1982).  In this case, the amendment adding a new class of persons who
  can provide notice is not clearly indicated as a clarification, and thus,
  it is intended to change the law.  According to the majority's theory,
  however, this change was unnecessary because the original law didn't
  require notice for latent defects.  The amendment is inconsistent with the
  majority's holding that the RRAA does not apply to latent defects.

         52.  I have further concerns about the majority's treatment of the
  amendment.  Despite the fact that the amendment is intended to respond to
  the injustice the majority seeks to prevent, the Legislature did not choose
  to make a general distinction between latent and patent defects.  Thus, the
  Legislature rejected the majority approach, and the majority is
  implementing it anyway.  The Legislature will be surprised to find that
  despite its carefully constructed solution to the notice problem, notice
  will be irrelevant for the tenants the Legislature sought to protect.

         53.  In summary, we are distorting our law on the relationship
  between statutory and common-law rights by enforcing a right directly
  denied by the plain meaning of the statute, all to give plaintiffs a theory
  of liability alternative to the theory they tactically chose to bargain
  away.  In doing so, we are undermining a statutory amendment the
  Legislature enacted to respond to this kind of case.  I respectfully
  dissent.




                                       ____________________________
                                       Associate Justice



         54.  REISS, D.J., dissenting.  I join in Justice Dooley's dissent
  insofar as it addresses 9 V.S.A.   4457-4458 and the amendments thereto.



                                       ____________________________
                                       District Judge, Specially Assigned


------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  Footnotes


FN1.  The Legislature amended  4458(a) in 1999, providing that a tenant
  could commence a suit upon the inaction of a landlord who had received
  actual notice of noncompliance with its warranty obligations from the
  "tenant, a governmental entity or a qualified independent inspector." 1999,
  No. 115 (Adj. Sess.),  6.  Because plaintiffs filed suit in 1997, before
  the amendment was passed, all references to  4458 will be to the statute
  as it read prior to the amendment, unless otherwise noted.

FN2.  This is a consolidated appeal.  As the Court understands it, the eight
  families who sent the August 1997 notice letter are all grouped under the
  case captioned "Candace A. Willard, et al. v. Parsons Hill Partnership, et
  al.," Supreme Court Docket Number 2003-494.  There are, however, other
  plaintiff-tenants under that caption who were not party to the August
  letter.  None of the plaintiff-tenants grouped under the case captioned
  "Brent E. Poulin, et al. v. Parsons Hill Partnership, et al.," Supreme
  Court Docket Number 2003-499, were party to the August notice letter.

FN3.  The dissent accuses the majority of reaching the decision in this case
  based on obvious sympathy for the plaintiffs, see post,  43, implying that
  it is sympathy rather than an appropriate statutory interpretation that
  compels the decision.  It then speculates that plaintiffs could receive a
  double recovery because, as a result of a settlement, plaintiffs omitted
  all negligence and consumer fraud claims against defendants, including
  failure to warn, from their last amended complaint.  To be clear, these
  claims were dropped as part of a multi-party settlement between plaintiffs
  and a variety of defendants who are no longer part of this case; the
  Rooneys and the partnership were not parties to that settlement.  Thus, as
  the dissent acknowledges, plaintiffs' claims against the Rooneys and the
  partnership were not themselves settled.  Without the benefit of argument
  from defendants on this topic, who did not raise any issue of double
  recovery, the dissent surmises that plaintiffs settled these claims for
  value.  It admits that there is no record evidence on this point because
  plaintiffs' settlement with the non-Rooney defendants is not disclosed, but
  it uses this argument to buttress its opinion that the plaintiffs are not
  worthy of the majority's alleged sympathies.  This argument is irrelevant
  in this case.  The majority opinion either stands or falls on its
  interpretation of the cause of action before this Court, and not on whether
  there were other causes of action that plaintiffs filed, but ultimately
  gave up as part of a settlement with other parties.

FN4.  Defendants also asserted implied indemnity claims against Taggart
  Brothers.  The trial court dismissed these claims as well, and defendants
  do not pursue them on appeal.

FN5.  Though the trial court reached the correct conclusion, its rationale
  contained a minor error.  The court concluded that plaintiffs' claim did
  not implicate Taggart Brothers' negligence because defendants' liability,
  if any, will flow from their failure to notify the tenants of the
  contamination problem.  While defendants' alleged failure to disclose the
  contamination problem to the tenants is troubling, standing alone, it
  cannot form the basis of warranty-of-habitability liability.  Instead,
  liability is based on defendants' failure to timely remedy the problem. 
  Nonetheless, we affirm because the trial court's rationale captures the
  essential point: any liability on this claim will result entirely from
  defendants' intentional failure to take action required by law.  See In re
  Audet, 2004 VT 30,  10, 176 Vt. 617, 850 A.2d 1000 (mem.) (noting that
  Court may affirm correct result even when reached by improper rationale).


