
VILLAGE OF BARRINGTON HILLS 

Minutes of the Regular Meeting September 22, 2008 

President Abboud called the Regular Meeting to order at 6:38 p.m. Roll Call. 

 Present Guests 
Robert G. Abboud, President James Drury, Resident 
Fritz H. Gohl, Pro-Tem Pamela Cools, Resident 
Walter E. Smithe, Trustee Mike McLaughlin, Resident 
Steven E. Knoop, Trustee Charlie Calo, Resident 
George L. Schueppert, Trustee Emily McHugh, Resident 
Beth Mallen, Trustee Roger Hutchison, Resident 
Elaine M. Ramesh, Trustee Jack Hickey, Resident 
Douglas Wambach, Village Attorney Linda Adair, Resident 
Robert Kosin, Director of Administration Owen Wheeler, Resident 
Michael N. Murphy, Police Chief John Rosene, Resident 
Kathleen Soeder, Village Clerk Joe Messer, Resident 
Karen Rosene, Resident 
Dennis Kelly, Resident 
Amelia McArdle, Resident 
Peter Wessel, Resident 
Nancy Schmid, Resident 
Dan Lundmark, Resident 

Trustee Gohl motioned to adjourn to Executive Session to discuss pending litigation and matters of personnel at 6:41 p.m. Trustee Mallen seconded. Roll Call. 

Ayes: 7 (Ramesh, Mallen, Schueppert, Knoop, Smithe, Gohl, Abboud) 
Nays: 0 
Absent: 0 

Meeting Adjourned 

EXECUTIVE SESSION 

PUBLIC SESSION 

President Abboud called the Public Session to order at 7:49 p.m. 











Village Board Meeting 
September 22, 2008 – page 2 

MINUTES 

Trustee Gohl motioned to approve the minutes of the Regular Meeting of August 25, 2008. Trustee Mallen seconded. All present said aye. 
Motion Approved 
Trustee Mallen motioned to approve the minutes of the Executive Session of August 25, 2008 as amended by Trustee Knoop. Trustee Schueppert seconded. All present said aye. 

Motion Approved 
PUBLIC COMMENTS 

President Abboud opened a thirty-five minute session for public comments at 7:52 p.m. 


Dan Lundmark, Chairman of the Equestrian Commission, submitted a letter to the Board asking that the restrictions of the Special Use permit recently granted to the Polo Club be reconsidered. He stated that the limitations placed on the Polo Club are causing it to lose members and believes that has a negative impact on the Village of Barrington Hills. It is the opinion of the Village Attorney that if the Club wishes to have the restrictions reconsidered, it would be required to reapply for a new special use permit including a new public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Board had hoped that the positive event experiences this summer would have initiated discussion between the Polo Club and local residents. President Abboud agreed to moderate a conversation between Dr. LeCompte, members of the Polo Club and the neighbors. 

As there were no additional comments, the public comments session ended at 8:52 p.m. 

BUILDING AND ZONING – George L. Schueppert 

Cricket Special Use Ordinance - Trustee Schueppert motioned to grant a special use permit to Cricket Communications to install an antenna on top of the silo on Otis Road, subject to certain conditions outlined by the ZBA. Testing has confirmed that this antenna will not interfere with the existing antennas for the police and cellular provider. The owners of the property detailed a plan for planting ivy to grow as screening on the silo’s exterior. Trustee Smithe asked if placing this antenna will preclude any other communications providers of 911 service from placing antennas on this silo. Reportedly, no other providers have expressed interested in using this site. 

Trustee Smithe seconded. Roll Call. 

Ayes: 7 (Ramesh, Mallen, Schueppert, Knoop, Smithe, Gohl, Abboud) 
Nays: 0 
Absent: 0 
Ordinance 08-15 Approved 
Village Board Meeting 
September 22, 2008 – page 3 


FINANCE – Walter E. Smithe 

Treasurer’s Report – Trustee Smithe presented the Treasurer’s report for the month of August, 2008. Trustee Smithe motioned to accept the Treasurer’s report as presented. Trustee Schueppert seconded. All present said aye. 

Motion Approved 

Treasurer Ryba will be working with the financial software vendor to allow Chief Murphy and Director of Administration Robert Kosin to access reports in her absence. 


Police Pension Board Report –Trustee Smithe motioned to accept the financial report of the Police Pension Board through August, 2008 as presented. Trustee Schueppert seconded. All present said aye. 

Motion Approved 


Overtime Reports – Trustee Smithe motioned to approve $ 19,565.12 in overtime expenses for August, 2008. Trustee Mallen seconded. Roll Call. 

Ayes: 7 (Ramesh, Mallen, Schueppert, Knoop, Smithe, Gohl, Abboud) 
Nays: 0 
Absent: 0 
Motion Approved 

Presentation of Bills – Trustee Smithe motioned to approve payment of the bills for the month of August to date of $ 314,584.82. Trustee Schueppert seconded. Roll Call. 

Ayes: 7 (Ramesh, Mallen, Schueppert, Knoop, Smithe, Gohl, Abboud) 
Nays: 0 
Absent: 0 

Motion Approved 


Trustee Schueppert presented his analysis which shows that the Village has $400,000 less in cash this year as compared to last year at the same time. 








Village Board Meeting 
September 22, 2008 – page 4 

ROADS AND BRIDGES – Elaine M. Ramesh 

Monthly Report – Resurfacing of Oak Knoll Road is complete. 

River Road drainage work will be addressed in phases, with the first phase of work being completed this Fall and the next phase beginning next year. 

Lake County Stormwater Management has approved completion of the Merri-Oaks drainage improvement project. 

Work is in progress to prepare a plan for addressing and maintaining drainage to be implemented in 2010. 

Miscellaneous Fall drainage projects will be sent out for bid in the next month. 

Cuba Township 
Calculations have been made on additional costs to the Village caused by increased salt prices. Estimates indicate an additional cost of as much as $100,000. Residents should be aware that extra precaution will be necessary, not just in Barrington Hills, while driving in the entire area this Winter. 

The draft addendum to the snow plowing agreement has not yet been executed. President Abboud offered to get involved to obtain a signed addendum. 


PUBLIC SAFETY – Fritz H. Gohl 

Monthly Report – The Village had previously requested a study be conducted to investigate the possible reduction of speed on Rt. 59 north of Rt. 68, in response to residents’ concerns. A letter received from the Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) states that a speed reduction will not be made. 

Lt. Semelsberger will be receiving the Cook County Sheriff Medal of Honor on October 15th. 

BUILDING AND ZONING – George L. Schueppert 

Building Permit Report – Trustee Schueppert reported that so far this year we have issued three single family permits, the lowest number of the last five years. As a result, the Village is experiencing a significant revenue shortfall. 

Trustee Schueppert shared complaints received about the structure at 230 Oak Knoll Rd. A permit has been issued for a garage with storage. The building is not suitable for habitation and neighbors have been advised to contact the police if anyone is seen living there. 




Village Board Meeting 
September 22, 2008 – page 5 


ZBA Report – Trustee Schueppert reported that this month most of the ZBA meeting was devoted to beginning consideration of amendments to the Village Code for the commercial boarding of horses. Trustee Schueppert expects a minimum of two discussion meetings and possibly a recommendation to the Board for their consideration in December. 

The ZBA voted 6-1 to uphold the cease and desist order for the LeCompte barn. The LeComptes communicated their intent to pursue legal action. The ZBA did ask that punitive action be deferred until consideration was given to new ordinances regarding the commercial boarding of horses in the Village. 

PLANNING – Steven E. Knoop 

Monthly Report - Trustee Knoop reported that the Plan Commission met earlier this month and continued work on the topic of external lighting. 
Scenic Easement Barrington Area Conservation Trust (BACT) - Trustee Knoop provided further discussion about the work BACT is doing with regards to Scenic Easements and provided copies of a template for review. Concern was expressed about how this would work on roads that are not under the jurisdiction of the Village. Trustee Ramesh suggested additional consideration for equestrian easements, road swales and culverts. 


INSURANCE – George L. Schueppert 

Monthly Report – Trustee Schueppert reported that all paperwork has been closed out with the Village’s previous healthcare provider. Both medical and dental expenses through the new provider continue to be lower than expected. 

HEALTH, BUILDINGS & GROUNDS, ENVIRONMENT – Beth Mallen 

Monthly Report – Beautification Committee has scheduled its first clean up event for October 25th. 

As reported last month, the cause of the odor in the Village Hall was determined and has been resolved. 


ATTORNEY – Douglas Wambach 

Attorney Wambach stated that matters of litigation and personnel had been addressed in Executive Session. 






Village Board Meeting 
September 22, 2008 – page 6 

ADMINISTRATION – Robert G. Abboud 

Appointments – President Abboud motioned approval of two new candidates for the 
Legal Committee. Since President Abboud is substantially increasing the workload of the Legal Committee, he feels that the Committee needs to expand to seven members. He is asking the Committee to look at Village Code and modify it so that existing code is easier to understand and so that the code can be better enforced. It was determined that the proposed candidates, Mark Presmyk and Mike Molli, should speak individually with each of the Trustees to discuss their qualifications. 

Canadian National (CN) Railway – The Surface Transportation Board (STB) has denied CN’s request to separate the business process from consideration of the environmental issues. 

Ike Day– Director of Administration Robert Kosin explained that a reception on the grounds of the Village Hall has been scheduled on October 1st for Ike, a local pug and the new face of Alpo dog food. Any and all reception expenses will be covered by the marketing company. 



Trustee Mallen motioned to adjourn the Public Session at 11:20 p.m. Trustee Schueppert seconded. All present said aye. 

Meeting Adjourned 

Approved_____________________ 


