Earthquake Safety Guide for Homeowners
FEMA 530
September 2005

Federal Emergency Management Agency
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program


Figure: Seal of the State of California

Publishing Information
The Homeowner’s Guide to Earthquake Safety was originally developed and 
published by the California Seismic Safety Commission. This modified version of 
the Guide was developed by FEMA in cooperation with the California Seismic 
Safety Commission staff. The original guide was prepared for publication by the 
staff of the Collaborative for Disaster Mitigation, San Jose State University.

Ordering Information
Copies of this publication are available from the FEMA Distribution Facility. To 
order, call 1-800-480-2520 and ask for FEMA publication 530.

On the cover:
Taken in Atascadero, California, on January 25, 2004, the photograph shows a 
home that slid 2 feet off its foundation as a result of the 6.5 San Simeon 
Earthquake.


Contents
Acknowledgments

Introduction

Earthquake Hazards In The United States

Earthquake Weaknesses

Unbraced Water Heaters
       Home Not Anchored To Foundation
       Weak Crawl Space Walls
       Pier-And-Post Foundations
       Unreinforced Masonry Foundations
       Homes Built On Steep Hillsides
       Unreinforced Masonry Walls
       Rooms Over Garages

Other Earthquake-Related Concerns
       Unreinforced Masonry Chimneys
       Foundations
       Homes With Unique Designs

Natural Gas Safety

Getting The Work Done

Geologic Hazards

What To Do During An Earthquake

What To Do Before An Earthquake

What To Do After An Earthquake

Resource Organizations

Earthquake Safety Guide for Homeowners 

California Homeowners: This Guide does not cover real estate disclosure 
requirements and related recommendations as described in the California Seismic 
Safety Commission publication The Homeowner’s Guide to Earthquake Safety. To
obtain that guide, go to http://www.seismic.ca.gov/sscpub.htm.


Acknowledgments

Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency
	Elizabeth Lemersal
	Jeffrey Lusk

Seismic Safety Commission
	Lucille M. Jones, Ph.D., Chair, Seismology
	Hon. Richard Alarcon, State Senate
	(Chris Modrzejewski)
	Hon. Carol Liu, State Assembly
	(Donald Manning)
	Lawrence T. Klein, Utilities
	Mark Church, Local Government
	Linden Nishinaga, P.E., City Government
	Celestine Palmer, Insurance
	Andrew A. Adelman, P.E., Cities/Building Official
	Stan Moy, A.I.A., Architecture and Planning
	Daniel Shapiro, S.E., Structural Engineering
	Vacant, Mechanical Engineering
	Bruce R. Clark, Ph.D., Geology
	Vacant, County Government
	Vacant, Emergency Services
	Donald R. Parker, Vice Chairman , Fire Protection
	Jimmie R. Yee, Social Services
	Vacant, Soils Engineering

Seismic Safety Commission Staff
	Richard McCarthy, Executive Director
	Robert Anderson
	Karen Cogan
	Henry Reyes
	Henry Sepulveda
	Fred Turner, Project Coordinator
	Sue Celli
	Rebecca Romo

Collaborative for Disaster Mitigation Staff
	Guna Selvaduray, Ph.D., Executive Director
	Patrick Chong, Webmaster
	Crystal Carrera, Administrative Assistant

The Commission gratefully acknowledges the assistance of the following:
	American Red Cross
	American Society of Home Inspectors
	Association of Bay Area Governments
	Building Education Center
	California Association of Realtors
	California Building Officials
	California Council of the American Institute of Architects
	California Geological Survey
	California Real Estate Inspection Association
	California Governor’s Office of Emergency Services
	City of Los Angeles
	Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
	Humboldt Earthquake Education Center
	International Code Council
	SBC
	San Diego Association of Governments
	Southern California Association of Governments
	Southern California Association of Residential
	Retrofit Professions
	Southern California Gas Company/Sempra
	Structural Engineers Association of California
	Committee on Earthquake Safety Issues for Gas Systems

Disclaimer: The effects, descriptions, recommendations, and suggestions included 
in this document are intended to improve earthquake preparedness; however, they 
do not guarantee the safety of an individual or a structure. FEMA takes 
responsibility for the inclusion of material in this document. FEMA and the
California Seismic Safety Commission assume no liability for any injury, death, 
property damage, loss of revenue, or any other effect


Introduction

Earthquakes, especially major ones, are dangerous, inevitable, and a fact of 
life in some parts of the United States. Sooner or later another “big one” will 
occur.

Earthquakes:
· Occur without warning
· Can be deadly and extremely destructive
· Can occur at any time

As a current or potential owner of a home, you should be very concerned about 
the potential danger to not only yourselves and your loved ones, but also to 
your property. For the purpose of this document, “home” includes single-family 
residences, duplexes, triplexes, and fourplexes.

The major threats posed by earthquakes are bodily injuries and property damage, 
which can be considerable and even catastrophic.

Most of the property damage caused by earthquakes ends up being handled and paid 
for by the homeowner.
· In a 2000 study titled HAZUS 99: Average Annual Earthquake Losses for the 
United States, FEMA estimated U.S. losses from earthquakes at $4.4 billion per 
year.
· Large earthquakes in or near major urban centers will disrupt the local 
economy and can disrupt the economy of an entire state.

However, proper earthquake preparation of your home can:
· Save lives
· Reduce injuries
· Reduce property damage

As a homeowner, you can significantly reduce
damage to your home by fixing a number of known
and common weaknesses.

This booklet is a good start to begin strengthening
your home against earthquake damage.

It describes:
· Common weaknesses that can result in your home being damaged by earthquakes, 
and
· Steps you can take to correct these weaknesses.

There are no guarantees of safety during earthquakes, but properly constructed 
and strengthened homes are far less likely to collapse or be damaged during 
earthquakes. FEMA advises you to act on the suggestions outlined in this
booklet and make yourself, your family, and your home safer.


Examples of Damage to Single-Family Homes

Figure 1: Photograph. Caption: San Fernando Earthquake, Feb. 9, 1971. Severely 
damaged split level one- and two-story wood frame dwelling. The one-story 
portion dropped about 3 feet. Photo source: Pacific Fire Rating Service.

Figure 2: Photograph. Caption: Loma Prieta Earthquake, Oct. 17, 1989. Home moved 
off of its foundation and was considered a total loss. Photo source: Robert A. 
Eplett, OES.

Figure 3: Photograph. Caption: Northridge Earthquake, Jan. 17, 1994. Single-
family residence damaged due to failure of multiple elements. Photo source: FEMA

Figure 4: Photograph. Caption: Northridge Earthquake, Jan. 17, 1994. Chimney 
collapse - common type of damage to unreinforced masonry. Photo source: FEMA 
News Photo.

Figure 5: Photograph. Caption: San Simeon Earthquake, Dec. 22, 2003. This home 
slid 2 feet off its foundation due to inadequate nailing of walls to its sill 
plates. Photo source: Dane Golden, FEMA News Photo.

Figure 6: Photograph. Caption: San Simeon Earthquake, Dec. 22, 2003. The 
collapsed porch was not adequately attached to this single-family residence. 
Photo source: Guna Selvanduray.


Earthquake Hazards in the United States

Figure: Map of the United States, including Alaska and Hawaii, that shows the 
geographical distribution of earthquake hazards, from lowest to highest. 

Earthquake hazards in the United States. This map is based on seismicity and 
fault-slip rates and takes into account the frequency of occurrence of 
earthquakes of various magnitudes. Locally, the hazard may be greater than that 
shown, because site geology may amplify ground motions. Based on U.S. Geological 
Survey National Seismic Hazard Map for the Coterminous United States (http://
eqhazmaps.usgs.gov/html/map_graphic.html).


Earthquake Weaknesses

The earthquake weaknesses identified in this section, if not corrected, can 
result in one or more of the following:
· Injury to occupants
· Severe damage to your home
· Broken gas and utility lines
· Fires from broken gas lines
· Damage to floors, walls, and windows
· Damage to the contents in the house
· Damage to the foundations

Figure: Cartoon illustration of a damaged house.

Please remember that:
· Retrofitting before an earthquake is relatively cheap.
· Doing major structural repairs to your home after an earthquake is very
expensive.
· Sometimes the damage is extensive enough to require the entire house to
be demolished.
· After an earthquake, there is usually a shortage of available licensed
contractors and engineers in the impacted area, because of the sudden
high demand for their services.
· An appropriate seismic retrofit will reduce damage and save you money.

Please consult your local Building Department and/or a licensed architect or
engineer for more detailed information.


Identify Weaknesses – Unbraced Water Heaters

The Problem
If water heaters are not properly braced, they can topple over during an 
earthquake, causing:
· Broken gas lines and gas leaks
· Fires resulting in major damage to homes
· Broken water lines and flooding

Figure 7: Photograph. Caption: The unbraced water heater in this home fell 
during an earthquake; the resulting fire destroyed the home. Photo source: 
Governor’s Office of Emergency Services.

Figure 8: Photograph. Caption: This unstrapped water heater tipped over during 
the 1984 Morgan Hill Earthquake. Fortunately, gas and water lines were not 
ruptured. Photo source: Guna Selvanduray.

How to Identify
· Is the water heater freestanding?
· Are there straps or other types of restraints securing the water heater?
· Are there straps or restraints bolted to the
studs?
· Are there flexible pipes for water and gas connected to the water heater?

Remember
· Replacing a water heater after an earthquake can cost more than $500.
· Repairing fire damage and flooding damage can cost several thousand dollars, 
including the entire cost of your home!
· There are many different ways of strapping a water heater. One example is 
shown on the next page.
· Check with your local Building Department for details of local requirements.
· Know where your main water valve is so that you can shut it off if you have a 
water leak.
· Know where your main gas valve is so that you can shut it off if you hear or 
smell a gas leak.


How-To – Brace Water Heaters

Water heaters must be braced (securely attached) to the studs in a wall.

The Solution
There are many solutions – all relatively inexpensive.
· Purchase and install a strap kit or bracing kit from your local hardware
store.

Other options include:
· Have a licensed plumber strap your water heater according to code.
· Use metal tubing or heavy metal strapping and lag screws and washers to secure 
the water heater to the wall studs.

The gas and water lines should also have flexible pipes. These are safer than 
rigid pipes during an earthquake.

Be sure to check the straps once a year. They may come loose due to vibrations,
or other causes.

Figure 9: Illustration. Caption: One method of water heater bracing. Straps and 
screws visible with water heater in garage installation. This illustration shows 
a water heater secured to a wall with two metal straps. In addition, the water 
heater has been equipped with flexible water and gas line connections.

How-To Resources
· Your local home improvement store
· Go to www.fema.gov, and under the Earthquake section, search for “Brace Hot 
Water Heaters” for specific bracing instructions.
n Publication: Guidelines for Earthquake Bracing of Residential Water Heaters. 
Department of General Services, Division of the State Architect, revised August 
11, 2004. Available online at http://www.documents.dgs.ca.gov/dsa/pubs/
waterheaterbracing_08-11-04.pdf.

Comparison of Cost: Preventing vs. Repairing Earthquake Damage
Project Cost: $20 to $200
Cost to Repair After an Earthquake: $500 to total value of home (if completely 
destroyed)


Identify Weaknesses – Home Not Anchored to Foundation

The Problem
Houses that are not bolted to the foundation can move off their foundations 
during earthquakes.

Figure 10: Photograph. Caption: This home wasn’t bolted and slid off its 
foundation. Sometimes the damage can be so bad that houses have to be 
demolished. Photo source: Office of Emergency Services.

How to Identify
· Go down into the crawl space – the area between the first floor and the 
foundation – to find out if your house is bolted to its foundation.
· Look for the heads of anchor bolts that fasten the sill plate – the wooden 
board that sits directly on top of the foundation – securely to the foundation. 
(See Figure 11a)
· You should be able to see the large nuts, washers, and anchor bolts, installed 
at least every 4 to 6 feet along the sill plate. Steel plates are sometimes used 
instead of anchor bolts. (See Figure 11b)

Remember
· It is very expensive to lift a house, and place it back on its foundation.
· Homes moving off their foundations can cause gas lines to rupture, which in 
turn can result in fires.

If your home has no foundation or an old concrete foundation, see the discussion 
under Other Concerns later in this guide.

Slab Foundations
Some homes are built directly on concrete slabs. These houses do not have crawl 
spaces and foundation walls.

Nearly all homes with slab foundations that were originally built to code will 
have anchor bolts or straps.

However, if the house is not bolted to the slab, you have an earthquake 
weakness.

Newer homes generally have anchor bolts or straps.

If you have an unfinished garage, you may be able to see the anchor bolts.

You are not required to remove siding, drywall, or plaster to determine if your 
house has anchor bolts.

How-To – Anchor Foundation

The Solution
Drill holes through the sill plate into the foundation and install anchor bolts. 
(See Figure 11a)

If there is not enough room to drill, you can attach steel plates to hold the 
sill plate to the foundation. (See Figure 11b)

Anchor bolts have to be installed properly for them to be effective.

You must obtain the proper permits from your local Building Department before 
beginning work.

Figure: Illustration. Caption: Anchor bolts or steel plates. A home’s crawl
space may be formed by a wood stud wall (see next page for description) between 
the foundation and the floor joists or the floor joists may rest directly on the 
sill plate. In either case, you should be able to see the heads of anchor bolts 
or steel plates installed at appropriate intervals. These fixtures fasten
the sill plate to the foundation. This figure consists of two figures, labeled 
11a and 11b. The figures show anchoring of the home to the foundation with 
anchor bolts and steel plates, respectively.

How-To Resources
· Detailed information for do-it-yourselfers or engineers can be found in the 
International Existing Building Code, published by the International Code 
Council.
· Go to www.fema.gov, and under the Earthquake section, search for “Strengthen 
Foundation Walls” for specific anchoring instructions.

Comparison of Cost: Preventing vs. Repairing Earthquake Damage
Project Cost: $250 to $5,000
Cost to Repair After an Earthquake: $25,000 to total value of home (if 
completely destroyed)


Identify Weaknesses – Weak Crawl Space Walls

The Problem
Wooden floors and stud walls are sometimes built on top of an exterior 
foundation to support a house and create a crawl space. (See Figure 14)

These stud walls carry the weight of the house.

During an earthquake, these walls can collapse if they are not braced to resist 
horizontal movement.

If the wall fails, the house may shift or fall.

Figure 12: Photograph. Caption: Damage to home due to crawl space wall failure. 
This photograph shows damage at one corner of a house.

How to Identify
· Go under the house through the crawl space, to see if there are any wood stud 
walls.
· If there are such walls, check to see if they are braced.
· There should be plywood panels adequately nailed to the studs OR there should 
be diagonal wood sheathing. (See Figure 13)
· If you have neither of these, the walls are probably insufficiently braced or 
unbraced.
· Horizontal or vertical wood siding is not strong enough to brace these walls.

Figure 13: Illustration. Caption: Diagonal sheathing. Common in older homes. 
This illustration shows a view of a crawl space from underneath a house. The 
components of the wall, including diagonal sheathing, are shown.

Remember
· It is very expensive to lift a house, repair these walls, and put it back on 
its foundation.

How-To – Strengthen Foundation Walls

The Solution
Plywood, or other wood products allowed by code, should be nailed to the studs.

The following are important:
· Type of wood product used
· Plywood thickness
· Nail size and spacing
· Not covering vents

Consult your local Building Department for permit requirements before starting 
work.

Figure 14: Illustration. Caption: Plywood or diagonal sheathing strengthens weak 
wood stud walls. If your home has a wood stud wall between the foundation and
the first floor, and the wall is not braced with plywood or diagonal sheathing, 
the house may fall or shift off its foundation during an earthquake. This 
illustration  consists of two drawings that show how plywood panels are used to 
strengthen the walls.

How-to Resources
· Detailed information for do-it-yourselfers or engineers can be found in the 
International Existing Building Code, published by the International Code 
Council
· Go to www.fema.gov, and under the Earthquake section, search for “Strengthen
Foundation Walls” for specific strengthening instructions.

Comparison of Cost: Preventing vs. Repairing Earthquake Damage
Project Cost: $500 to $2,500
Cost to Repair After an Earthquake: $25,000 to total value of home (if 
completely destroyed)


Identify Weaknesses – Pier-and-Post Foundations

The Problem
The outside of the house is supported by wood posts resting on unconnected 
concrete piers. Siding is often nailed to the outside of the posts,
making them not easily visible.

During an earthquake these posts can fail, if they are not braced against 
swaying.

If the posts fail, the house may shift or fall.

Figure 15: Photographs. Caption: The pier-and-post foundation under this home 
shifted during a recent earthquake. This figure consists of two photographs that 
show damage to the foundation and structure.

How to Identify
· Go under the house to see if there is a continuous foundation under the 
outside walls.
· If you do not see a continuous foundation, you may have an earthquake 
weakness.
· If you see only unconnected concrete piers and wood posts, or only wood posts, 
supporting the outside walls, you have an earthquake weakness.

Remember
· Horizontal or vertical wood siding is not strong enough to brace pier-and-post 
foundations.
· Major structural repairs, like lifting an entire house to repair the posts and 
putting it back, are very expensive.

How-To – Strengthen Pier-and-Post Foundations

The Solution
Consult a licensed architect or engineer, and a licensed building contractor who 
specializes in foundations, to fix this problem.

It may be possible to make the foundation safer by bracing the posts.

You might be better off to add a new foundation and plywood walls in the crawl 
space to make sure that the house will not shift or fall off its foundation 
during an earthquake.

How-to Resource
· Detailed information for engineers can be found in the International Existing 
Building Code, published by the International Code Council.

Comparison of Cost: Preventing vs. Repairing Earthquake Damage
Project Cost: $1,000 to $25,000
Cost to Repair After an Earthquake: $20,000 to total value of home (if 
completely destroyed)


Identify Weaknesses – Unreinforced Masonry Foundations

The Problem
Unreinforced masonry—brick, concrete block, or stone—foundations often cannot 
resist earthquake shaking. They may break apart, or be too weak to hold anchor 
bolts. Homes may shift off such foundations during earthquakes, damaging the
walls, floors, utility lines, and home contents.

Figure 16: Photograph. Caption: This is an unreinforced stone foundation. They 
typically fail during earthquakes.

Figure 17: Photograph. Caption: Note the bricks exposed in this unreinforced 
masonry foundation.

How to Identify
· If your home’s foundation is brick or stone, and looks like one of the 
foundations shown in the photos here, it is probably unreinforced.
· If there is a space filled with grout between the inner and outer faces of a 
brick foundation (where anchor bolts and reinforcing steel could be installed), 
it may be reinforced.
· If the outside of the foundation is covered, you may have to look under the 
house to see the type of foundation you have.
· If you are not sure what to look for, seek the services of a licensed engineer 
to determine if your foundation is reinforced or not.

Remember
· It is cheaper to do this before an earthquake damages the house than after.

How-To – Retrofit Masonry Foundations

The Solution
There are several ways to fix this problem.

The most common approach is to replace all or part of the existing foundation 
with a poured reinforced concrete foundation.

Another solution is strengthening the unreinforced brick or stone foundation, 
which is generally expensive.

Seek the help of a licensed architect or engineer, and a licensed foundation 
contractor or general contractor.

How-to Resource
· Detailed information for engineers can be found in the International Existing 
Building Code, published by the International Code Council.

Comparison of Cost: Preventing vs. Repairing Earthquake Damage
Project Cost: $15,000 to $50,000
Cost to Repair After an Earthquake: $15,000 to total value of home (if 
completely destroyed)


Identify Weaknesses – Homes Built on Steep Hillsides

The Problem
Houses built on the sides of steep hills are often set on exposed posts or 
columns, as shown in the Figures 18 and 19.

The potentially hazardous conditions that are unique to homes on steep hillsides 
are:
· Stilt-type posts with or without diagonal
bracing
· Walls with very different heights or that are stepped or sloped down the 
hillsides.

If these posts or walls are not properly braced, they may collapse during an 
earthquake.

Sometimes, the supports on the downhill side will be hidden behind a tall wall 
that encloses a large unfinished space. (This is similar to, but taller
than, a crawl space under a typical house built on flat ground.)

Figure 18: Photograph. Caption: This hillside building was built on an unbraced 
tall wall that failed.

Figure 19: Photograph. Caption: This photograph shows an interior detail of a 
home similar to the one above, with substantial damage to a building with an 
unbraced tall wall.

How to Identify
· Is the house located on a slope?
· Are the columns or walls supporting the home braced?
· If you are not sure if there is bracing or if the bracing is adequate, consult 
a licensed engineer.

Remember
· It is very expensive to lift a house, repair the posts, and put it back.

How-To – Strengthen Homes on Steep Hillsides

The Solution
Consult a licensed architect or engineer, and a licensed contractor, to fix this 
problem.

Figure 20: Illustration. Caption: Hillside homes with sloped and tall walls or 
posts require special engineering. This illustration shows the locations of 
sloped and tall walls on a hillside house.

How-to Resource
· Detailed information can be found in the International Existing Building Code, 
published by the International Code Council.

Comparison of Cost: Preventing vs. Repairing Earthquake Damage
Project Cost: $1,000 to $50,000
Cost to Repair After an Earthquake: $10,000 to total value of home (if 
completely destroyed)


Identify Weaknesses – Unreinforced Masonry Walls

The Problem
Houses built of unreinforced masonry – bricks, hollow clay tiles, stone, 
concrete blocks, or adobe
· are very likely to be damaged during earthquakes.

The mortar holding the masonry together is generally not strong enough to resist 
earthquake forces.

Anchorage of walls to the floor and the roof is critical.

These houses are weak (brittle) and can break apart.

Walls may fall away or buckle, resulting in damage.

Figure 21: Photograph. Caption: The plaster-covered brick walls of this building 
collapsed during a recent earthquake.

How to Identify
· Can bricks or stone be seen from the outside (unless the walls are covered 
with stucco)?
· Do the brick walls have “header courses” of bricks turned endways every five 
or six rows? (See Figure 22)
· Was the house built before 1940?

Figure 22: Illustration. Caption: Header courses of bricks are usually placed 
endwise every six or so rows in unreinforced masonry walls to tie the outer 
layer of bricks to the layers inside the wall. This illustration shows the 
locations of header courses in a brick wall.

If you cannot tell from the outside, turn off the power and take the cover plate 
off one of the electrical outlet boxes on an outside wall and look for brick or 
other masonry.

If the wall is concrete or concrete block, it is very difficult to find out if 
reinforcing steel was added during construction.

You will then need:
· The house’s plans, which may be on file with the Building Department, or
· To consult a licensed engineer to make the determination.

Remember
· It is very expensive to shore up a house, remove damaged walls, and put in new
walls.

How-To – Strengthen Unreinforced Masonry Walls

The Solution
Consult a licensed architect or engineer to fix this problem.

One solution may involve:
· Tying the walls to the floor and roof
· Installing a steel frame and bolting the wall to it.

Figure 23: Photograph. Caption: Unreinforced masonry wall strengthened by 
installing a steel frame inside.

Figure 24: Photograph. Caption: Bolting of unreinforced masonry wall to steel 
frame on the outside. This photograph shows the location of bolts used to 
connect the wall to the steel frame.

How-to Resource
· Detailed information can be found in the International Existing Building Code, 
published by the International Code Council.

Comparison of Cost: Preventing vs. Repairing Earthquake Damage
Project Cost: Project and Repair costs can vary widely.
Cost to Repair After an Earthquake: Project and Repair costs can vary widely.


Identify Weaknesses – Rooms over Garages

The Problem
The large opening of a garage door and the weight of a second-story room built 
over the garage can result in the walls being too weak to withstand earthquake 
shaking.

When the narrow sections of the wall on each side of the opening are not 
reinforced or braced, the weakness is worse.

Figure 25: Photograph. Caption: This mountain home was built over a garage, and 
its walls were not strong enough to withstand an earthquake. This photograph 
shows a house that has collapsed because of the failure of the garage walls.

How to Identify
· Is the garage door opening in line with the rest of the house? (See Figure 26)
· If this is the case, additional bracing may not be needed.
· Is the house shaped like Figure 27? If this is the case, are there braces or 
plywood panels around the garage door opening?
· If there are no braces or plywood panels, strengthening may be needed.
· Consult a licensed architect or engineer to determine the strengthening 
required.

Figure 26: Illustration. Caption: If the wall of the main house is in line with 
the wall containing the door of a garage with a room over it, the adjoining wall 
may help brace the garage. This illustration is an overhead view of a house and 
attached garage.

Figure 27: Illustration. Caption: Additional bracing. Home configuration where 
there is no in-line wall. Additional bracing may be appropriate in this 
situation. This illustration is an overhead view of a house and attached garage.

Remember
· Many homes with this weakness have been severely damaged in past earthquakes.

How-To – Strengthen Rooms over Garages

The Solution
Consult a licensed architect or engineer to design plywood paneling or a steel 
frame around the door opening (See Figure 28).

Have plans drawn.

Obtain a permit from your local Building Department.

Figure 28: Illustration. Caption: Bracing garage walls. If your house has a
room over the garage, the garage walls may not be strong enough to hold up 
during an earthquake unless they are braced with plywood panels and steel 
straps. This illustration shows the locations of plywood panels and steel straps 
used to brace garage opening walls.

How-to Resource
· Detailed information can be found in the International Existing Building Code, 
published by the International Code Council.

Comparison of Cost: Preventing vs. Repairing Earthquake Damage
Project Cost: $5,000 to $25,000
Cost to Repair After an Earthquake: $15,000 to total value of home (if 
completely destroyed)


Other Earthquake-Related Concerns

Other Concerns – Unreinforced Masonry Chimneys

The Problem
Many chimneys are built of unreinforced brick or stone. During an earthquake, 
these can collapse
or break and fall on the roof.

When the chimney fails, the falling stones and bricks can:
· Cause injuries
· Damage the house
· Damage cars

Tall slender chimneys are most vulnerable.

Figure 29: Photograph. Caption: This unreinforced chimney fell during a recent 
earthquake.

Figure 30: Photograph. Caption: Morgan Hill Earthquake. Broken chimney fell on 
roof.

How to Identify
· Check the mortar between the bricks or stones with a screwdriver. If it 
crumbles when you pick
at it, the chimney may be a hazard.
· Inspect the attic and floor spaces for metal ties that should be holding the 
chimney to the
house.
· Determining whether a chimney is susceptible to earthquake damage is not 
always easy.
When in doubt, consult a licensed engineer or contractor.

Remember
· Do not locate patios, children’s play areas, or parking spaces near a 
questionable chimney.
· Tell family members to get away from chimneys and fireplaces during 
earthquakes.

How – To – Strengthen Masonry Chimneys

Tear down the old or damaged chimney and replace with a newly constructed 
chimney.

Several steps can be taken to reduce the risk of damage from falling chimneys, 
depending upon the type of chimney you have. They include:
· Add plywood panels at the roof or above the ceiling joists to prevent the 
brick or stone from falling into the house.
	- This can be done by layering plywood above the ceiling, in the house’s 
	attic, or nailing plywood under the shingles when reroofing.
· Replace the upper chimney with metal flues.
· Strengthen the existing chimney.
	- This can be a complicated process, depending upon the construction and
	height of the existing chimney.

Consult your local Building Department and obtain necessary permits first.

Figure 31: Photograph. Caption: Photograph showing damaged chimney removed. Note 
that the fireplace is now not functional.
Comparison of Cost: Preventing vs. Repairing Earthquake Damage
How-to Resource
· Go to www.fema.gov, and under the Earthquake section, search for “Strengthen 
Chimneys” for specific strengthening instructions.

Comparison of Cost: Preventing vs. Repairing Earthquake Damage
Project Cost: $2,000 to $12,000
Cost to Repair After an Earthquake: $15,000 to total value of home (if 
completely destroyed)


Other Concerns – Foundations

No Foundation
The Problem. Some older houses were built on wood beams laid directly on the 
ground, without foundations. These houses may shift during earthquakes, causing
structural damage and breaking utility lines.

How to Identify. Look under the house. If you see no concrete or masonry around 
the outside walls, the house may lack a foundation.

What Can Be Done. You may need to add a foundation to make the house earthquake 
resistant. Just as when strengthening or replacing an unreinforced masonry 
foundation, you will require the advice of a licensed architect, engineer, or 
foundation contractor.

Old Concrete Foundation
The Problem. Some older concrete foundations were made with sand or stone that 
interacted chemically over time, and the concrete eventually crumbles and 
becomes too soft to withstand earthquake forces.

How to Identify. Inspect the foundation for large cracks in the concrete, 
concrete crumbling off the foundation, or concrete crumbling when you pick at it 
with a screwdriver.

What Can Be Done. You may need to replace some or all of the foundation. You 
should consult a licensed foundation contractor or an engineer.


Other Concerns – Homes with Unique Designs

The Problem. The design and construction features of some homes make them 
vulnerable to earthquake damage, especially if these homes are not specifically 
designed and built to resist earthquakes. Homes at risk are those with irregular 
shapes, large windows (which can break in earthquakes and scatter shards of 
glass), more than two stories, irregular walls, or porches and overhangs.

How to Identify. Many homes with these features are strong enough to withstand 
earthquakes and it is difficult to tell whether such homes need strengthening. 
If you have doubts about one or more of these features in your home, or in a 
home you are planning to buy, you should consult a licensed architect or 
engineer for an assessment.

What Can Be Done. A professional can advise you on how to identify and fix 
earthquake weaknesses if necessary. For example, large windows can be made safer 
by applying plastic film on them.


Natural Gas Safety

The Problem
Natural gas piping and appliances can be damaged during earthquakes, causing gas 
leaks.

If ignited, this can result in fires that can burn part of, or, the entire 
house.

About one in four fires after an earthquake is related to natural gas leaks.

Gas leaks after an earthquake are more likely if:
· There are structural weaknesses.
· Gas appliances are not anchored.
· Flexible pipe connections are not used.

The primary concern is property loss from fire damage.

The potential for life loss is limited since most single-family homes have 
several safe exits.

How to Identify
· Examine all natural gas appliances (water heaters, dryers, stoves, ovens, 
furnaces) to see if they are anchored to the floor or walls, and have flexible 
pipe connections.

Plan Ahead
Locate your gas meter outside your home.

Identify the exact location of the shutoff valve and make sure that you have 
access to it.

Make sure you have a wrench that is readily available to turn off the gas when 
needed.

Figure 32: Illustration. Caption: Manual shutoff valve locations. This 
illustration shows the location and operation of a gas line shutoff.


Manual Gas Shutoff
· The most cost-effective way to manage the risk from natural gas is to know how 
and when to manually shut off the gas.
· Use the wrench to turn off the manual valve located at the gas meter (See 
Figure 32).
· Shut off your gas only if you:
	- Smell gas
	- Hear gas escaping
	- Suspect a broken gas pipe, appliance, vent, or flue

Remember
· Once the gas has been shut off, service can be restored only by utility 
personnel or qualified plumbers.
· High demands for qualified personnel after an earthquake can lead to 
substantial delays in restoring natural gas service.

Resources
· Go to www.fema.gov, and under the Earthquake section, search for “Retrofit Gas 
and Water Lines” for retrofitting instructions.
· Publication: Improving Natural Gas Safety in Earthquakes. California Seismic 
Safety Commission, Adopted July 11, 2002. Available online at  
http://www.seismic.ca.gov/pub/CSSC_2002-03_Natural%20Gas%20Safety.pdf.

Automatic Gas Shutoff Options
There are a variety of automatic gas shut-off valves available. These cost more 
than manual shutoff valves and may provide additional safety, but may also have 
some disadvantages.

The types of valves available include:
· Earthquake shake-actuated valves
· Excess flow valves
· Methane detectors
· Hybrid systems
· Others

These can be installed on the “customer owned” side of the gas meter.

Consult your local Building Department because:
· Some installations will require building permits.
· Some local jurisdictions have adopted ordinances requiring automatic gas 
shutoff devices at the time of sale or during significant renovations.


Getting the Work Done

Plans, Permits, and Contractors
· Decide which strengthening project or projects you are going to do.

· Get the necessary building permits first.
       - If you are “doing-it-yourself,” you still need the proper permits.
       - For more complex projects, have a licensed architect or engineer draw up 
the necessary plans and specifications.
       · Interview two or three architects or engineers.
       · Ask for references or former clients.
       · Talk to references or former clients.
       · Compare experience, ideas, and fees.

       - Submit the plans for approval to your local building department.

       - Remember: the building codes are designed for your safety.

There are many publications that describe
strengthening projects in detail.

Visit the California Seismic Safety Commission’s website at www.seismic.ca.gov, 
which provides many useful links.
· Get the documents that relate to your project and read them.
       - This will help you to better understand what the architect or engineer 
is doing, and also what the contractor is doing.

· The International Existing Building Code Appendix Chapter 3 contains the best 
current guidelines. Ask your local Building Department to review a copy.

· Select your licensed contractor.
       - First make sure the contractor is properly licensed.
       - Interview at least two or three contractors.
       - Ask your licensed architect or engineer for recommendations.
       - Ask for references or former clients.
       - Talk to references or former clients.
       - Compare experience, fees, and terms of contract.
       - Get at least three written bids for the construction work.
       - The lowest bid may not be the best bid.

· Keep all plans, permits, and other records of your strengthening project.
       - Provide future buyers of your home with these.

If your home has been designated as “historical,” you also may need to comply 
with local regulations regarding historical structures.
· Contact your local Building Department for further help with this.

Remember
Whether you do it yourself, or hire a contractor, you need permits from your 
local Building Department.

It costs far less to correct earthquake weaknesses before an earthquake than to 
repair the damage after an earthquake.

If your home is damaged in an earthquake, you will probably also have other 
costs such as lodging, medical, etc.

Don’t Hesitate – Mitigate!


After a Disaster – Hire a Licensed Contractor

After a Disaster...
Do Not:
· Rush into repairs, no matter how badly they are needed.
· Hire the first contractor who comes along.
· Accept verbal promises.

Do:
· Get proof that the person you are dealing with is a licensed contractor 
appropriate for the work to be done.
· Get the contractor’s license number and verify that it is current and valid.
· Get a written contract that contains all the details of the job to be 
performed.
· Get at least three bids.
· Check references of other work the contractor has done, if possible, in your 
area.
· Develop a payment schedule with the contractor.
· Consider a completion bond on large projects.

Avoid Payment Pitfalls
· Try to limit your down payment. Some State laws limit the amount of money a
contractor can request as a down payment. Contact your State or local
consumer agency to find out what the law is in your area.
· Try to make payments during the project contingent on completion of a defined
amount of work. This way, if the work is not proceeding according to schedule,
the payments are also delayed.
· Withhold at least 10% of the total contract price until the project is
complete.
· Do not make final payment until:
       - The building department has signed off on it,
       - You are satisfied with the job, and
- You take a final walk-through to make sure work is complete and done 
correctly.


Geologic Hazards

Sellers of real estate may be required to disclose to buyers certain information 
regarding natural hazards that can affect the property being sold. In addition 
to flood and fire hazard information, disclosure of seismic hazards may also be 
required.

This section:
· Describes briefly the basic geology-related hazards, and
· Introduces the government mapping programs that define which areas are 
susceptible to those hazards.

Ground Shaking:
· Ground shaking causes 99% of the earthquake damage to homes.
· Areas near large active faults are more likely to be shaken severely than 
areas in the rest of the state.

Landslide:
· Earthquakes can also trigger landslides.
· Earthquake shaking can cause the soil and rock to slide off a slope, ripping 
apart homes on the slope and/or crushing homes downhill (See Figure 33).

Figure 33: Photograph. Caption: Landslide, San Simeon Earthquake, December 22, 
2003. Landslides on San Gregorio Road in Atascadero, California, only a short 
distance away from where the homes with the most damage were located. This 
photograph shows rock that has fallen from a hillside onto a road.

Fault Rupture:
· An actual crack forms and the ground is offset along the two sides of a fault 
during an earthquake (See Figure 34).
· A house built over an active fault can be torn apart if the ground ruptures 
beneath it.
· If the house is built over a “creeping” fault (one that moves slowly with no 
earthquakes or a series of very small earthquakes) the damage may not be noticed 
for some time.

Figure 34: Photograph. Caption: Fault Rupture. Landers Earthquake of June 28,
1992, produced a surface rupture of over 50 miles along faults in the Mojave 
Desert. This photograph shows different ground levels along opposite sides of a 
fault rupture.

Lateral Spreading:
· Intense shaking during an earthquake can cause the soil to break into blocks 
that move apart from each other. This can cause damage to the foundation of a 
house (See Figure 35).

Figure 35: Photograph. Caption: Lateral Spreading, Loma Prieta Earthquake,
October 17, 1989. Lateral spreading damaged levee road along the San Lorenzo 
River. This photograph shows a large crack in the surface of the levee road.

Liquefaction:
· During earthquakes, loose, wet sandy soil can become almost like quicksand, 
and lose its ability to support structures. This can cause the foundation of a 
house to sink, break, or tilt (See Figure 36).

Figure 36: Photograph. Caption: Loma Prieta Earthquake, October 17, 1989. 
Lateral spreading, liquefaction and sand boils caused extensive damage in the 
Marina District of San Francisco, about 60 miles away from the epicenter.

Tsunami:
· A tsunami is a series of large sea waves caused by an underwater earthquake or 
landslide.
· Coastal areas are prone to tsunami damage.
· Tsunami waves can come from a great distance and can cause flooding or wash 
away houses in low-lying areas along the shore.

Dam Failure:
· Earthquake damage to a dam can cause sudden and devastating flooding of houses
downstream.
· During the 1971 San Fernando Earthquake, the Lower San Fernando Dam above the 
San Fernando Valley was damaged. Had it failed, it would have flooded the homes 
below, causing many deaths and injuries. (See Figure 37). Risk of an aftershock 
forced residents in an 11-square-mile area to evacuate for the next 3 days.

Figure 37: Photograph. Caption: Lower San Fernando Dam that was badly damaged by 
the 1971 San Fernando Earthquake.

Recommendation:
If you live in a low-lying coastal area or a dam inundation zone, become 
familiar with evacuation routes to higher ground and be prepared to evacuate 
such areas immediately after an earthquake.


Earthquake Hazard Mapping

Enormous progress has been made in understanding how, why, and where earthquakes
occur. This has led to the creation of maps that highlight areas having the 
highest likelihood of damaging earthquakes.

Five mapping programs have been developed to help people lead safer lives in 
earthquake country.

U.S. Geologic Survey National Seismic Hazard Maps
The USGS provides seismic hazard assessments for the United States and areas 
around the world. These hazard maps serve as the basis for seismic provisions 
used in building codes and influence billions of dollars of new construction 
every year. For more information about seismic hazard analysis, the USGS maps, 
and the underlying data on which they are based, visit the USGS website
at http://earthquake.usgs.gov/hazmaps/.

The earthquake hazards map on page 3 of this Guide is based on the USGS Seismic 
Hazard Map for the Coterminous United States, available from the USGS website at 
http://eqhazmaps.usgs.gov/html/map_graphic.html.

Earthquake Fault Zone Maps
These maps show active earthquake faults prone to surface ruptures and identify 
a 1,000-foot-wide zone with the fault line at the center.

Seismic Hazard Zone Maps
These maps show areas where landslides and liquefaction are most likely to occur 
during earthquakes.

Tsunami Inundation and Evacuation Route Maps
Maps for the Pacific Coast show areas where low-lying regions are exposed to 
tsunami inundation. These maps are in various stages of preparation and 
availability. More information about tsunamis and tsunami mapping is available 
from the National Tsunami Hazard Mitigation Program, Center for Tsunami 
Inundation Mapping Efforts, at http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/tsunami/time/.

Dam Inundation Maps
These maps show the areas below major dams that may be flooded in the event of 
their failure.

How Are These Maps Used?
The zones defined by the maps are at greatest potential risk when a major 
earthquake occurs. This is particularly the case when the earthquake occurs 
during or shortly after a heavy rainfall, which increases the likelihood of 
liquefaction and landslides.

Special geotechnical studies are required before buildings can be built in 
Earthquake Fault Zones or Seismic Hazard Zones.

Your local building or planning department can show you copies of USGS seismic 
hazard maps and other earthquake hazard maps that may be available for your 
community.

The seller of real estate within a hazard zone may be required to disclose that 
the property lies within such a zone at the time of sale.


What To Do During an Earthquake

1. If You Are Indoors—Stay There! “Drop, Cover, and Hold On.” Get under a sturdy 
desk or table and hang on to it, or move into a hallway or get against an inside 
wall. Stay clear of windows, fireplaces, and heavy furniture or appliances. Get 
out of the kitchen, which is a dangerous place in earthquakes since it’s full of
things that can fall on you. Don’t run downstairs or rush outside while the 
building is shaking or while there is danger of falling and hurting yourself or 
being hit by falling glass or debris.

2. If You Are Outside—Get Into the Open, away from buildings, power lines, 
chimneys, and anything else that might fall on you.

3. If You Are Driving—Stop, but carefully. Move your car as far out of traffic 
as possible. Do not stop on or under a bridge or overpass or under trees, light 
posts, power lines, or signs. Stay inside your car until the shaking stops. When 
you resume driving, watch for breaks in the pavement, fallen rocks, and bumps in 
the road.

4. If You Are On Or Near a Steep Hillside, Watch Out for Landslides, falling 
rock, trees, and other debris that could be loosened by earthquakes.

Figure: Illustration. The illustration consists of three drawings that show a 
figure dropping to the floor, taking cover under a table, and holding onto a 
table leg.

If You Feel a Strong Earthquake or Receive a Tsunami Warning When You are on the 
Coast

1. Drop, Cover, and Hold On. Watch for falling objects until the earthquake is 
over.

2. Move to Higher Ground or inland away from the coast immediately. A tsunami 
may be coming. Go on foot if possible. The first waves may reach the coast 
within minutes after the ground shaking stops. The first wave is almost never 
the largest. Later waves may be spaced tens of minutes apart and can continue 
arriving for many hours.

3. There May Be No Time for Authorities To Issue a Warning. If you do not hear 
an evacuation announcement, but notice a sudden drop or rise in water level or 
hear a loud noise coming from the water, nature may be warning you of impending 
danger.

4. Stay Away From the Coast. Do not return to the shore after the first wave. 
Waves may continue to arrive for hours.

5. Listen to a Radio for an “All Clear” before returning to the shore.

Figure: Illustration. The illustration consists of three icon-type drawings that 
show a figure climbing a hill to escape rising water, a sign warning against 
remaining on the open coast, and an emergency radio.



