
   DEWITT BANK AND TRUST COMPANY, CONSERVATOR OF THE ESTATE OF WILLIAM
LANCE MCNEELY, PETITIONER V. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

   No. 89-829

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1989

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The United States Court Of
Appeals For The Eighth Circuit

   Brief For The United States In Opposition

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Question Presented
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statement
   Argument
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. 18-21) is reported
at 878 F.2d 246.  The opinion of the district court (Pet. App. 1-17)
is unreported.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals was entered on June 26, 1989.
A petition for rehearing was denied on September 7, 1989 (Pet. App.
22).  The petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on November 25,
1989.  The jurisdiction of this Court is invoked under 28 U.S.C.
1254(1).

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether 33 U.S.C. 702c, which provides that "(n)o liability of any
kind shall attach to or rest upon the United States for any damage
from or by floods or flood waters at any place," bars petitioner's
action under the Federal Tort Claims Act for damages arising from
injuries suffered in a lake that is part of a multipurpose federal
project whose functions include flood control.

                               STATEMENT

   1. Petitioner is the conservator of the estate of William Lance
McNeely.  McNeely was seriously injured when he dove into Merrisach
Lake in Arkansas and struck his head on the lake bottom.  Pet. App. 4,
19.

   Though it was once a natural body of water, Merrisach Lake has been
modified as part of the McClellan Kerr Project.  The purposes of this
project include flood control and the improvement of navigation on the
Arkansas River.  In connection with the McClellan Kerr Project, the
Army Corps of Engineers routed a canal through Merrisach Lake and
constructed a dam and a lock in its vicinity.  The water impounded by
the dam and lock has increased the boundaries and altered the
configuration of Merrisach Lake.  Pet. App. 1-2, 19.

   McNeely was injured at Merrisach Park, a park developed by the
Corps of Engineers on the shore of the lake.  To prevent erosion of
the lake shore, the Corps built a retaining wall along the water's
edge.  The water at the base of the retaining wall is shallow;  its
precise level fluctuates as the Corps retains or releases water at the
nearby lock and dam.  McNeely was injured when he dove from the
retaining wall into the lake late at night during an attempt to rescue
a friend.  Pet. App. 19.

   2. Petitioner filed this action under the Federal Tort Claims Act,
28 U.S.C. 2671 et seq., in the United States District Court for the
Eastern District of Arkansas.  After a trial, the district court
concluded that the government was liable for McNeely's injuries and
awarded damages totalling $980,700 against the United States.  Pet.
App. 1-17.  /1/

   3. The court of appeals reversed, holding that the government was
immune from liability under the Flood Control Act of 1928, 33 U.S.C.
702c.  Pet. App. 18-21.  /2/ Quoting from this Court's decision in
United States v. James, 478 U.S. 597, 608 (1986), the panel noted that
Section 702c was intended "to ensure beyond doubt that sovereign
immunity would protect the (g)overnment from 'any' liability
associated with flood control." Pet. App. 19.  Thus, the court
continued, the immunity conferred by that statute "shields the
government from tort claims arising from construction or management of
federal flood control projects." Id. at 20.  The court pointed out
that "(f)lood control was an essential component of the multiple
purpose project that expanded Merrisach Lake" and concluded,
accordingly, that the lake's waters were "flood waters" for purposes
of the statute -- i.e., waters "contained in * * * a federal flood
control project for purposes of or related to flood control." Ibid.
(quoting James, 478 U.S. at 605).  Finally, the court rejected
petitioner's argument that Section 702c did not apply because
McNeely's injuries resulted from the project's recreational, rather
than flood control, operations.  Pet. App. 20.  /3/

                               ARGUMENT

   1. Section 702c provides that "(n)o liability of any kind shall
attach to or rest upon the United States for any damage from or by
floods or flood waters at any place * * *." In James, this Court held
that the terms "flood" and "flood waters" (478 U.S. at 605):

         apply to all waters contained in or carried through a federal
      flood control project for purposes of or related to flood
      control, as well as to waters that such projects cannot control.

   In this case, it is established that flood control is among the
purposes of the McClellan Kerr Project.  The district court noted that
this multi-purpose project was undertaken "(i)n order to keep the
channel (of the Arkansas River) open and exercise some flood control."
Pet. App. 1.  Likewise, the court of appeals held that "(f)lood
control was an essential component of the multiple purpose project
that expanded Merrisach Lake." Pet. App. 20.  In its present
configuration, therefore, Merrisach Lake undoubtedly consists of
"waters contained in or carried through a federal flood control
project" and falls squarely within James' definition of "flood
waters."

   Because Merrisach Lake is part of a multi-purpose project whose
functions include flood control, there is no conflict between the
decision in this case and Graci v. United States, 456 F.2d 20 (5th
Cir. 1971), cert. denied, 412 U.S. 928 (1973).  See Pet. 17-19.  In
Graci, owners of property along the Mississippi River-Gulf OUtlet, a
navigation project constructed by the Corps of Engineers to provide a
short-cut from the Gulf of Mexico to New Orleans, sought to recover
for damages suffered when hurricane-driven waters overflowed the
outlet and flooded their property.  The government did not contend
that the project had any flood control function, 456 F.2d at 22, and
the Fifth Circuit noted that the question presented by Section 702c
was whether that statute protected the United States from liability
that was "unconnected with flood control projects," id. at 26
(emphasis in original).  See James, 478 U.S. at 601-602 n.2 (Graci
held that Section 702c "conferred immunity only for floods or flood
waters connected with a flood control project").  The project at issue
here is not "unconnected" with flood control.  /4/

   2. This is one of three cases since James in which the courts of
appeals have held that the government is immune under Section 702c
from claims arising from alleged negligence in connection with the
operation of recreational facilities located on lakes included in
flood control projects.  See McCarthy v. United States, 850 F.2d 558
(9th Cir. 1988), cert. denied, 109 S. Ct. 1312 (1989);  Dawson v.
United States, No. 89-3371 (3d Cir. Jan. 16, 1990).  All three
decisions have concluded that the waters included in such lakes are
"flood waters" for purposes of Section 702c and thus that the
government is entitled to immunity under the statute.  Pet. App.
19-21;  McCarthy v. United States, 850 F.2d at 561-563;  Dawson v.
United States, slip op. 5-6.  /5/ These courts have also refused to
allow plaintiffs to avoid Section 702c's reservation of sovereign
immunity by casting their claims in terms of a failure to warn or by
arguing that their injuries have arisen from operations wholly
unrelated to flood control.  Pet. App. 20;  McCarthy v. United States,
850 F.2d at 561-563;  Dawson v. United States, slip op. 7-8.

   Similarly, in Mocklin v. Orleans Levee District, 877 F.2d 427
(1989), the Fifth Circuit held that Section 702c barred a claim
against the government arising out of a drowning in a channel that had
been dredged to facilitate the movement of equipment needed for the
construction of flood control levees.  The court reasoned that the
water in the channel was "flood water" as that term had been construed
in James, that the presence of the water had contributed to the
drowning, and that the government was therefore immune.  The panel
rejected the claim, analogous to petitioner's here, that the death was
unrelated to a flood control project because it was attributable to
channels that had been "negligently designed for navigation." 877 F.2d
430 n.6.

   Although in James the recreational users of flood control lakes
were injured or killed by releases of water through federal dams, the
reasoning of the Court in that case supports the decision here and the
other circuit-level decisions that have upheld the government's
immunity under Section 702c.  James emphasized that the government's
immunity under that provision extends to liability of "any kind * * *
for any damage from or by floods or flood waters at any place," adding
that it is "difficult to imagine broader language." 478 U.S. at 604
(emphasis in original).  The legislative history, the Court noted,
shows "that the sweeping language of Section 702c was no drafting
inadvertence" and that "Congress clearly sought to ensure beyond doubt
that sovereign immunity would protect the Government from 'any'
liability associated with flood control." Id. at 608.  The Court made
clear that Section 702c extends to claims framed in terms of failures
to warn recreational users of hazards on flood control lakes,
explaining that "the manner in which to convey warnings, including the
negligent failure to do so, is part of the 'management' of a flood
control project." 478 U.S. at 609-610.  Finally, with respect to
claims targeted at the allegedly recreational aspects of a flood
control project, one of the court of appeals decisions reversed in
James had held that the government was not immune if "a producing
cause of the damage or injury is a government employee's negligence in
omissions or commissions that diverge from acts strictly for the
purpose of controlling floods or flood waters * * *." James v. United
States, 760 F.2d 590, 603 (5th Cir. 1985).

   Contrary to petitioner's contention (Pet 11-15), there is no
conflict between the decision in this case and that in Denham v.
United States, 834 F.2d 518 (5th Cir. 1987).  Although the district
court in Denham held that Section 702c did not bar a suit against the
government by a recreational user of a flood control lake, the issue
was not raised on appeal and the Fifth Circuit had no occasion to
consider it.  The language that petitioner quotes from the Fifth
Circuit's opinion in Denham (Pet. 11) addressed only the applicability
of the discretionary function exception of the Federal Tort Claims
Act, 28 U.S.C. 2680(a).  834 F.2d at 521.  All references to Section
702c that are quoted in the petition (Pet. 11-12) are from the
district court's opinion.

   In a recent decision not cited in the petition, the Tenth Circuit
has declined to extend the government's immunity under Section 702c to
a recreational injury in a multi-purpose flood control lake.  Boyd v.
United States, 881 F.2d 895 (1989).  In that case, a swimmer
snorkeling in a flood control lake was injured by a power boat;  his
complaint alleged that the government was negligent in failing to warn
swimmers that boating was permitted in the area in which the accident
occurred and in failing to zone the lake to prohibit boating in that
area.  The court of appeals reversed a decision dismissing the
complaint on the basis of the discretionary function exception,
remanded for further consideration of a state recreational use statute
similar to the one involved in this case, and held that Section 702c
did not bar the suit.  With respect to Section 702c, the Tenth Circuit
stated that "Congress' concern was to shield the government from
liability associated with flood control operations * * * not liability
associated with operating a recreational facility." It held that
"(w)ithout attempting to delineate for every conceivable situation the
necessary link between flood control activities and injuries sustained
at a flood control project before Section 702c immunity applies, in
the present case * * * the requisite nexus has not been established."
881 F.2d at 900.

   The court in Boyd was critical of the reasoning of McCarthy, 881
F.2d at 900 & n.6, and adopted a more limited view of Section 702c
than that applied in McCarthy, Dawson, or this case.  But while Boyd
held that Section 702c requires some "link" or "nexus" (881 F.2d at
900) between flood control activities and a plaintiff's injuries, the
panel expressly declined to establish any general standard to govern
that question.  Thus, it is unclear how broadly the Tenth Circuit may
read Boyd in the future.  /6/

   The court of appeals' decision in this case is consistent with
James, a case in which, less than four years ago, this Court applied
Section 702c to injuries arising from recreational activities.  With
the exception of Boyd, in which the panel focused on the particular
facts and declined to articulate any general standard, no court of
appeals decision after James has reached a different conclusion.
Under these circumstances, we submit that the issue of Section 702c's
applicability to accidents of the type at issue here does not now
warrant this Court's attention.

   3. Contrary to petitioner's suggestion (Pet. 20-21), the court of
appeals' decision did not entail any improper review of the district
court's findings of fact.  The district court noted -- and there can
be no genuine dispute -- that the functions of the McClellan Kerr
Project include flood control.  Pet. App. 1, 2-3.  In substance, the
court of appeals held that this undisputed fact was sufficient to
establish the government's entitlement to immunity under Section 702c.
 This case therefore does not present any question concerning the
application of Fed. R. Civ. P. 52's well-established standard for
appellate review of findings of fact.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully submitted.

   KENNETH W. STARR

      Solicitor General

   STUART M. GERSON

      Assistant Attorney General

   ROBERT S. GREENSPAN

   IRENE M. SOLET

      Attorneys

   FEBRUARY 1990

   /1/ The district court's opinion focused on the Arkansas
Recreational Use Statute, Ark. Code Ann. Section 18-11-301 et seq.
(1987), which generally exempts operators of recreational facilities
from liability for negligence.  The court concluded that this case
fell within an exception to the statute that permits recovery in the
event of a "malicious, but not mere negligent, failure to warn against
an ultra-hazardous condition, structure, personal property, use or
activity actually known to such owner to be dangerous." Pet. App.
5-15.

   /2/ The government did not plead the Flood Control Act as a defense
in its answer to the complaint, but did raise that defense in its
trial brief.  The district court did not address the applicability of
the statute.  The court of appeals noted that the Flood Control Act
presented a jurisdictional defense and thus considered it on appeal.
Pet. App. 19.

   /3/ In this portion of its opinion, the court observed that "(i)n
operating the project for flood control and navigation," the Corps
maintained the waters in Merrisach Lake at the shallow level at which
they stood at the time of the accident.  In fact, the lock and dam
that regulate the level of the lake are navigational works.  But, as
noted above, the lake is part of a multi-purpose project, one of whose
major purposes is flood control.

   /4/ James establishes that Section 702c is applicable to a
multi-purpose project -- i.e., one whose functions include, but are
not limited to, flood control.  In both of the cases that the Court
decided in James, the plaintiffs were engaged in recreational
activities on waters included in federal flood control projects at the
time they were injured.  478 U.S. at 599, 601.  Indeed, in one of the
cases, the plaintiffs cited literature in which the government had
promoted the recreational features of a flood control lake.  Id. at
599.  Before James, numerous decisions had applied Section 702c to
multi-purpose projects.  See Aetna Ins. Co. v. United States, 628 F.2d
1201, 1203 (9th Cir. 1980) (collecting cases), cert. denied, 450 U.S.
1025 (1981).

   /5/ In McCarthy, the plaintiff was seriously injured when he dove
into shallow water at a recreational area on a lake created as part of
a flood control project.  He alleged that the government had been
negligent in the manner in which it constructed and maintained the
recreational area in which the injury occurred, in encouraging
swimming and diving there, and in failing to warn of its hazardous
condition.  The Ninth Circuit affirmed the dismissal of the complaint.
 Contrary to petitioner's contention (Pet. 19-20), there is no
significant factual distinction between McCarthy and this case.

   Similarly, in Dawson, the Third Circuit affirmed the dismissal of
two actions arising from drownings at a swimming area in a flood
control lake.

   /6/ Any conflict between the court of appeals' decision and Hayes
v. United States, 585 F.2d 701 (4th Cir. 1978), does not warrant this
Court's review.  In Hayes, a decision that predated James, the Fourth
Circuit, in a two-page opinion, purported to recognize a distinction
between those operations of a multi-purpose project that are related
to its flood control function and those that are not.  585 F.2d at
702-703.  To the extent that the brief opinion in Hayes might be read
to support petitioner's claim, the decision must be deemed to have
been qualified by James.  As noted above, James emphasized the breadth
of Section 702c's plain language and legislative history, confirming
that Congress's intention was to protect the government "from 'any'
liability associated with flood control." 478 U.S. at 608.  Any
suggestion to the contrary in Hayes would have to yield to this
Court's reading in James of the plain language of Section 702c.
Although the Court's opinion in James included a reference to Hayes
(and an accompanying parenthetical) in a string citation in a footnote
(478 U.S. at 605-606 n.7), the same footnote cited with approval to
Morici Corp. v. United States, 681 F.2d 645, 647-648 (1982), in which
the Ninth Circuit specifically rejected the Hayes court's suggestion
that immunity depends on "the particular use to which the project was
being put when the negligence occurred." Id. at 677.
