Spectrum Landscape Services, Inc., No. 4313 (July 17, 1998)
Docket No. SIZ-98-4-28-20



                    UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
                  SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
                 OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
                        WASHINGTON, D.C.

_________________________________
                                 )
SIZE APPEAL OF:                  )
                                 )
Spectrum Landscape Services, Inc.)
                                 )
     Appellant                   )   Docket No. SIZ-98-4-28-20
                                 )
Re: Robins Maintenance, Inc.     )   Decided:  July 17, 1998
                                 )
Solicitation No.                 )
RFP F09650-97-R-0109             )
Department of the Air Force      )
Robins Air Force Base, George    )
________________________________ )


                           APPEARANCES

                     James S. Ganther, Esq.
                          for Appellant
                                
                     J. Hatcher Graham, Esq.
                  for Robins Maintenance, Inc.

                             DIGEST
                                
This Office will dismiss as moot an unsuccessful offeror's appeal
of a size determination concluding the challenged firm was small,
where  the  procuring agency has awarded the contract  at  issue,
even  though  the  issues  on appeal are  not  specific  to  that
procurement.

A  size  appeal becomes moot as to the instant procurement  where
contract award occurs during the pendency of the appeal.


Where  this  Office  has decided the merits of  a  previous  size
appeal,  which addresses the same issues as those raised  in  the
instant  appeal; and which involves the same protested firm,  the
same  alleged affiliates, and the same SIC code and type of  work
under  the contract, the outcome in the instant case is  governed
by the previous decision, even though a different party filed the
previous appeal, where that party failed either to raise any  new
issues or to present probative evidence not previously raised.

                            DECISION

BLAZSIK, Administrative Judge:

                          Jurisdiction

     This appeal is decided under the Small Business Act of 1958,
15  U.S.C. Sections 631 et seq., and 13 C.F.R. Parts 121 and  134
(1998).

                             Issues
                                
     Whether  this  Office will dismiss as moot  an  unsuccessful
offeror's   appeal  of  a  size  determination   concluding   the
challenged firm was small, where the procuring agency has awarded
the  contract at issue, and the issues on appeal are not specific
to that  procurement.
     
     Whether  a  size  appeal  becomes moot  as  to  the  instant
procurement  where contract award occurs during the  pendency  of
the appeal.
     
     Whether  a previous size appeal decision, which this  Office
decided  on  the merits, and which addresses the same  issues  as
those  raised in the instant appeal; and which involves the  same
protested  firm, the same alleged affiliates, and  the  same  SIC
code and type of work under the contract, governs the outcome  in
the  instant  case,  even  though a  different  party  filed  the
previous  appeal,  where that party failed either  to  raise  new
issues or to present probative evidence not previously raised.
     
                              Facts
                                
      On  September  12, 1997, the Department of the  Air  Force,
Robins  Air  Force  Base, Georgia, issued this negotiated,  total
small  business  set-aside procurement for  grounds  maintenance.
The  Contracting  Officer  assigned  to  it  Standard  Industrial
Classification code 0782 (Lawn and Garden Services), which has  a
$5   million   average  annual  receipts  size   standard.    The
procurement was for a base year, plus four option years.  Initial
proposals were due October 14, 1997.

     On  March  23,  1998, the Contracting Officer  notified  the
unsuccessful offerors that Robins Maintenance, Inc. (RMI) was the
apparently  successful  offeror.  On  March  30,  1998,  Spectrum
Landscape Services, Inc. (Spectrum or Appellant) orally protested
RMI's  size  status  to  the Contracting  Officer,  and,  through
counsel,  sent  a  timely  written protest  on  March  31,  1998.
13 C.F.R. Sections 121.1004(a)(2); 121.1005.

                           The Protest
                                
     The  protest  alleged  RMI  has  the  following  affiliates:
Central  Georgia  Waste Services, Inc. (CGWS);  Systems  Oriented
Solutions, Inc. (SOS); Emergency Network of Georgia, Inc.  (ENG);
Environmental  Science and Technology, Inc. (EST); Everett  Dykes
Grassing Co., Inc. (EDG); Dykes Construction, Inc. (DCI); Cochran
Rental  Co., Inc. (CRC); Davis Propane Gas Co., Inc.  (DPG);  and
Dykes Westside Industries, Inc. (DWI).  The protest alleged that,
although RMI's own annual receipts are below the applicable  size
standard,  these receipts-- when combined with RMI's affiliates--
exceed the size standard.
     
     On  April  1,  1998, the Contracting Officer  forwarded  the
protest  to  the  Small Business Administration's  (SBA)  Atlanta
Office  of  Government Contracting-Area III (Area Office)  for  a
size determination.
     
                  The Area Office Determination
                                
      The Area Office file contains RMI's SBA Form 355, financial
statements, and 1994, 1995, and 1996 Federal income tax  returns,
and  other documents.  As required, RMI reported it had been  the
subject of a previous size determination.

      RMI's response stated that Everett Dykes, III, inherited no
ownership interest in EDG because his father, Everett Dykes, Jr.,
had sold all his EDG stock to purchase for RMI an earlier grounds
maintenance  contract at Robins.  RMI relied on  Size  Appeal  of
Aumann, Inc., No. 3743 (1993), in which this Office affirmed  the
previous  SBA  size  determination  that  RMI  and  EDG  are  not
affiliates.

     The  Area Office determined RMI was not affiliated with  EDG
because  in  Aumann,  this Office found no  substantive  business
connections between the two firms, and Spectrum here has provided
no  new information supporting the existence of common ownership,
management,  facilities,  employees, or equipment  between  them,
except for an equipment lease, an arm's-length transaction.   The
Area  Office  found it unnecessary to determine whether  RMI  and
CGWS are affiliated, as their combined receipts do not exceed the
size  standard.  The Area Office determined that, while SOS, ENG,
and  EST are affiliated with CGWS, these firms are not affiliated
with  RMI.   The  Area Office did not determine  whether  RMI  is
affiliated with DCI, CRC, DPG, or DWI.
     
     The Area Office concluded RMI was a small business under the
applicable   size   standard.   Appellant   received   the   size
determination  on April 13, 1998, and filed an appeal  postmarked
April 28, 1998.

                       Arguments on Appeal
                                
      Appellant asserts the Area Office erroneously relied on the
earlier  size determination, to which Appellant was not a  party,
and  should have conducted a new investigation.  Thus,  the  Area
Office erroneously concluded RMI and EDG are not affiliates,  and
RMI  is  a  small business.  Appellant asserts RMI is  affiliated
with  EDG  based  on  familial identity of interests,  the  newly
organized  concern  rule,  and  the  totality  of  circumstances.
Appellant  did  not  reassert its protest  claims,  that  RMI  is
affiliated with SOS, ENG, EST, DCI, CRC, DPG, and DWI.
Appellant requests discovery in the form of subpoenas and an oral
hearing.  (Appellant filed an April 27, 1998 Motion to Admit  New
Evidence, prior to its appeal.)

      On  May  8, 1998, RMI filed a response to the appeal.   RMI
asserts  Appellant's  "new  evidence"  relates  only  to   issues
unconnected  with  RMI.   Further,  RMI  asserts  the  issue   of
affiliation  between RMI and EDG was settled five  years  ago  in
Aumann.

      On  May  15,  1998,  the  Air  Force  awarded  the  instant
procurement to RMI.

      Appellant filed further evidence and argument on  June  11,
1998.  RMI filed a reply, received on June 30, 1998.

                           Discussion
                                
     Since  the appeal was filed and served within 15 days  after
Appellant  received the size determination, the appeal is  timely
for this procurement.  13 C.F.R. Section 121.304(a)(1).
     
                          I.  Mootness
                                
        The   threshold  issue  is  whether  this  Office   lacks
jurisdiction  because the appeal now is moot  following  contract
award.   If  jurisdiction exists, the sole substantive  issue  is
whether RMI is affiliated with EDG.
     
      Although applicable SBA size regulations neither explicitly
require  nor  prohibit   dismissal of  moot  cases,  the  Federal
Register  preamble  to the final rules establishing  this  Office
supports  such  dismissals.   It  states:  "Dismissals  based  on
mootness  or  lack  of  jurisdiction  are  proper  under  general
principles of administrative law and will be undertaken  on  that
authority."  48 Fed. Reg. 55832, 55834 (Dec. 16, 1983).

     Absent  explicit  statutory  or regulatory  authority,  this
Office--as  an  administrative  tribunal--looks  to  the  Federal
courts  for  guidance.   Among the elements  of  jurisdiction  is
whether  a  live case or controversy exists; if not,  the  appeal
must be dismissed as moot.  Size Appeal of Resource Applications,
Inc.,  No.  4252 (1996) (citing St. Paul Fire & Marine  Insurance
Co.  v. Barry, 438 U.S. 531, 537 (1978); Benton v. Maryland,  395
U.S. 784, 788 (1969)).
     
      An  essential  part  of the analysis for  a  live  case  or
controversy,  is  standing.  Standing to  sue  a  Federal  agency
requires  establishing  all  elements  of  a  tri-partite   test:
(1)  plaintiff's  injury-in-fact, which  must  be  "concrete  and
particularized"  and  "actual  or imminent,  not  conjectural  or
hypothetical";  (2)  a  causal link to the agency's  action;  and
(3)  the likelihood, as opposed to the mere speculation, that the
injury  will  be  redressed by a favorable  decision.   Lujan  v.
Defenders of Wildlife,  504 U.S. 555, 560-61 (1992).

             A. Applicability to the Present Procurement
                                
      The  applicable regulation (13 C.F.R. Section  134.302(a)),
which  permits  "[a]ny  person  adversely  affected  by  a   size
determination"  to file an appeal, encompasses  the  first  Lujan
element.    The   preamble  referred  to  above,  explains   that
"adversely  affected"  is "grounded in  the  concept  of  'direct
economic  effect'  and  has consistently been  limited  to  other
bidders  or  offerors in the procurement at  issue  in  the  size
protest and appeal."  48 Fed. Reg. at 55833.  Thus, Appellant, as
an  unsuccessful offeror on this procurement, satisfies the first
element.  The size determination itself, the agency action  which
caused the alleged injury, satisfies the second Lujan element.

      The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) requires that this
Office's decision, "if received before award, will apply  to  the
pending acquisition."  48 C.F.R. Section 19.302(i).  Accordingly,
at  the  time Appellant filed its appeal, this Office's favorable
decision  likely  would have redressed Appellant's  injury,  thus
satisfying  the  third  Lujan  element.   Based  on  the   above,
Appellant's  April 28th appeal then satisfied  Lujan  because  it
presented to this Office a live controversy.

       During  the  pendency  of  an  appeal,  however,  a   live
controversy   may  become  moot  and  jurisdiction  will   abate.
Specifically,  even  "where litigation poses a  live  controversy
when  filed, the [mootness] doctrine requires a federal court  to
refrain  from deciding it if 'events have so transpired that  the
decision  will neither presently affect the parties'  rights  nor
have  a  more-than-speculative chance of affecting  them  in  the
future.'"   Columbian Rope Co., v. West, 1998  WL  247851  at  *2
(D.C. Cir. 1998) (vacating as moot Size Appeals of Columbian Rope
Company,  SBA  Nos.  4117  (1995)  and  4185  (1996))  (citations
omitted) (alteration in original); see also County of Los Angeles
v. Davis, 440 U.S. 625, 631 (1979).

     In  Columbian  Rope,  the D.C. Circuit  concluded  the  size
appeal   had  become  moot  during  the  pendency  of  subsequent
litigation,  because the contractor had completed  all  the  work
under  the contract and all options had expired.  Thus, the court
no  longer  could  order  relief that would  redress  Columbian's
injury.   This  holding in essence acknowledges  the  failure  to
satisfy the third element of the Lujan tri-partite standing test,
which results in loss of standing.
     
     Before  applying  Columbian Rope to the  instant  case,  the
Administrative  Judge  notes  this Office's  authority  to  grant
relief  is much more limited than that of a federal court.   Even
though  the  Small  Business Act requires procuring  agencies  to
"accept   as  conclusive  [SBA's]  determination  as   to   which
enterprises are to be designated 'small-business concerns'" under
the  set-aside program (15 U.S.C. Section 637(b)(6)), this Office
neither  can order nor recommend a procuring agency to cancel  an
award, to make an award, or not to exercise options. [1]
     
     Furthermore,  the FAR provides that an SBA ruling  "received
after  award  shall  not apply to that acquisition."   48  C.F.R.
Section  19.302(i).  Regardless of whether the  procuring  agency
awards  the  contract prior to a size appeal to this  Office,  or
during  the  pendency of the size appeal, as here, this  Office's
subsequent  decision will not apply to that procurement.  Marwais
Steel  Co.  v.  Department of the Air Force, 871  F.  Supp.  1448
(D.D.C.  1994)  (award made prior to size appeal upheld,  despite
subsequent finding on remand that awardee was other than  small);
Savini Construction Co. v. Crooks Brothers Construction Co.,  540
F.2d  1355  (9th Cir. 1974) (award made during pendency  of  size
appeal  upheld despite Size Appeals Board's reversal of awardee's
"small" size determination). [2] GAO also interprets the  FAR  to
authorize  award  during the pendency of a size appeal,  even  if
this  Office subsequently finds the awardee is other than  small.
Verify, Inc., B-244401.2, 92-1 CPD Paragraph 107 (Jan. 24, 1992);
JRR  Construction Company, Inc., B-220592, 85-2 CPD Paragraph 383
(Oct. 4, 1985). [3]
     
     Because  this  Office's  decision  does  not  apply   to   a
procurement  after  award, under Columbian Rope,  OHA  no  longer
could  redress  Appellant's injury after the  May  15th  contract
award.   As of that date, the instant size appeal became moot  as
to  the  present procurement.  Under the Lujan tri-partite  test,
the  third  element no longer is satisfied, because there  is  no
live controversy as to the present procurement.

     The  Administrative Judge notes that the present procurement
is  for  a  base  year and four option years.  Although  no  size
regulation governs options, the presence of options does not save
a  size  appeal from mootness because exercise of  an  option  is
within  the procuring agency's sole discretion.  Size  Appeal  of
Resource  Applications, Inc., No. (4252) (citing Size  Appeal  of
Cordant,  Inc., No. 4193 (1996)).  The FAR does not  require  the
contracting officer to review the contractor's size status before
exercising  an option.  See 48 C.F.R. Section 17.207.  Therefore,
notwithstanding  the  presence  of  options,  this  Office  lacks
jurisdiction over this appeal because it is moot for the  instant
procurement.

                     B. Future Applicability
                                
      This  Office's longstanding practice has been to decide  an
appeal  on the merits, even after contract award, when the appeal
raises  size  issues  that  are  not  specific  to  a  particular
procurement.  It has done so because the size determination would
have future applicability.

     Where  a  challenged  firm  files  an  appeal,  the  "future
applicability" derives from the prohibition that  an  other  than
small  firm  can neither self-certify as a small  business  on  a
future  procurement nor can seek any other SBA assistance,  until
SBA   recertifies   it   as   a  small   business.    13   C.F.R.
Section 121.1009(g). [4] Thus, the other than small firm not only
loses the instant procurement, but also suffers a separate injury
as  a  result  of the size determination.  Because this  Office's
favorable  decision can redress that injury, the  firm  appealing
its  own other than small size would satisfy all elements of  the
Lujan tri-partite standing test.
     
     Conversely,  where  as here, appellant  is  an  unsuccessful
offeror  and  contract  award  has occurred,  it  is  problematic
whether  this  Office's  decision can  redress  the  injury  and,
therefore, would satisfy the future applicability test.


     This  Office  dismissed  as moot  two  recent  size  appeals
involving  non  contract-specific issues, filed  by  unsuccessful
offerors,   after  contract  award.   In  Size  Appeal   of   MDP
Construction,  Inc.,  No. 4007 (1995), the  Administrative  Judge
concluded  no live issue remained because "there is no  assurance
that  [the challenged firm] will bid on any future contracts with
the   same   size  standard,"  and,  in  any  event,  "a   future
determination. . .would depend on its receipts at the time of the
determination."
     
       In  Size Appeal of Golden North Van Lines, Inc., No.  4304
(1998),  the  Administrative  Judge  specifically  rejected   the
unsuccessful  offeror's assertion it suffered injury  because  of
the   challenged firm's eligibility to bid on future  set-asides,
even  though  the  latter had a history  of  bidding  on  similar
projects  with the same size standard.  The Administrative  Judge
noted it was mere speculation that the unsuccessful offeror would
bid  again  and  qualify  at  some  future  time  for  a  similar
procurement with the same size standard.
     
     In  Columbian  Rope, supra, where the issues  were  contract
specific,  the  D.C.  Circuit questioned the  concept  of  future
applicability, noting that a conclusion that the challenged  firm
was  other  than small would not redress the plaintiff's  injury,
because "application of these rules depends on facts that  change
over  time."  1998 WL 247851 at *2.  This observation is  equally
applicable to non contract-specific size issues, as here, for the
same reason.
     
     Accordingly,  the  Administrative Judge concludes  Appellant
failed  to  show  it will suffer a "future applicability"  injury
because  of  RMI's continued eligibility to bid on a  procurement
with  the same size standard, and therefore, it failed to satisfy
the  first  Lujan element.  Hence, this Office lacks jurisdiction
over this appeal because it is moot. [5]
     
              II.  Effect of Previous OHA Decision
                                
      Even  if this case were not moot, the Administrative  Judge
still  would deny the appeal.  Where this Office has decided  the
merits of a previous size appeal, which addresses the same issues
as  those  raised in the instant appeal; and which  involves  the
same  protested firm, the same alleged affiliates, and  the  same
SIC  code and type of work under the contract, the outcome in the
instant case is governed by the previous decision, even though  a
different party filed the previous appeal.  Size Appeal  of  DCT,
Incorporated,  No.  4075 at 4 (1995); see  also  Size  Appeal  of
Agrigold Juice Products, No. 4136 (1996).

     Here,  Appellant  raises  the same issue  of  EDG's  alleged
affiliation with the protested firm, RMI, as did the Appellant in
Aumann, and the contracts involved the same type of work. [6]  In
Aumann  this  Office  decided EDG and RMI  were  not  affiliates.
Thus,  to  the  extent Appellant failed either to raise  any  new
issues or present probative evidence not previously presented  in
Aumann, that decision controls.
     
                           Conclusion
                                
      This Office lacks jurisdiction over this appeal because  it
is moot.  Accordingly, the Administrative Judge DISMISSES it.

      This is the Small Business Administration's final decision.
13 C.F.R. Section 134.316(b).



                                  ______________________________
                                  GLORIA E. BLAZSIK
                                  Administrative Judge



_________________________

       [1]  In  contrast,  the Court of Federal  Claims  and  the
district  courts  "may award any relief that the court  considers
proper, including declaratory and injunctive relief."  28  U.S.C.
Section  1491(b)(2).   Agency boards of contracting  appeals  may
grant "any relief" available in the Court of Federal Claims.   41
U.S.C.  Section 607(d).  GAO may determine whether  an  award  or
proposed  award  "complies with statute and regulation,"  and  if
not, "shall recommend that the Federal agency -- (A) refrain from
exercising  any  of its options under the contract;  .  .  .  (D)
terminate the contract; (E) award a contract consistent with  the
requirements of [law]."  31 U.S.C. Section 3554(b)(1).
       [2]  However,  if this Office issues its  decision  before
award,  it does apply to that procurement.  Three S Constructors,
Inc. v. United States, 13 Cl. Ct. 41 (1987).
       [3]  While GAO, as an agent of the Congress, may not  bind
either  the  courts or the Executive agencies to its bid  protest
decisions  for  Constitutional reasons,  the  courts  give  great
deference  to  its  long-standing expertise.   QualMED,  Inc.  v.
Office  of  Civilian Health and Medical Program of the  Uniformed
Services, 934 F. Supp. 1227 (D. Colo. 1996).
       [4] A firm need not seek recertification for an other than
small   size   determination  relating  solely  to  a  particular
procurement.  13 C.F.R. Section 121.1010(b).
       [5]  Because  this  Office has no  jurisdiction  over  the
appeal,  the  Administrative Judge need not consider  Appellant's
requests for oral hearing and subpoenas.  Similarly she need  not
consider  Appellant's request to introduce new  evidence.   Also,
since  the  record closed on May 13, 1998, Appellant's June  11th
submission  and  RMI's June 30th reply were late filed,  and  the
Administrative Judge will not consider them.
      [6]  The  only  new  issues raised  here,  not  previously
addressed  in Aumann, are Appellant's assertions that RMI  either
finances road construction equipment for EDG, or RMI and EDG  are
both  in  the  road  construction  business.   Because  Appellant
offered  no  probative evidence to support these assertions,  its
arguments are without merit.

                                               Posted: August, 1998

