
   UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, PETITIONER V. RIVERSIDE BAYVIEW HOMES,
INC., ET AL.

   No. 84-701

   In The Supreme Court Of The United States

   October Term, 1985

   On Writ of Certiorari To The United States Court Of Appeals For The
Sixth Circuit

   Reply Brief For The United States

   1. In its attempt to convince the Court that the government's
position in this case would, in the words of the court of appeals,
lead to federal regulation of "low lying backyards miles from a
navigable waterway" (Pet. App. 21a), Riverside makes a number of
factual misstatements and incomplete statements that require
correction and clarification.  We briefly address these matters before
turning to Riverside's legal arguments.

   A. First, Riverside asserts (Br. 4) that its property is "ringed on
all four sides by paved public streets and fully developed urban
areas." Preliminarily, we note that even if Riverside's assertion were
correct, it would be irrelevant, because the presence of "man-made
dikes or barriers" does not defeat the 'Corps' jurisdiction over
wetlands adjacent to "waters of the United States." 33 C.F.R.
323.2(d).  (We also note that many of the Great Lakes are "ringed on
all sides by paved public streets," including interstate highways.
Certainly, Riverside would not contend that this fact negates their
status as "waters of the United States" under the Clean Water Act.)
More important, however, is the fact that there is direct, unimpeded
access from the mid-east boundary of Riverside's property to
additional marshes and the open waters of Black Creek, a navigable
water of the United States.  Black Creek in turn flows into Lake St.
Clair, and that lake connects directly with the Great Lakes Erie (to
the south) and Huron (to the north).  Indeed, it would not be an
exaggeration to state that one could, after wading through a cattail
marsh, swim directly from Riverside's property to the Great Lakes.
This statement is documented by an aerial photograph and a topographic
map of Riverside's property (PX 1 (J.A. 118);  PX 23 (S. Ct. Exh. 4),
reproduced in part at App., infra) that accurately reflect the true
location of the four "paved public streets and fully developed urban
areas." /1/ As these exhibits demonstrate, the property touches paved
streets on only two sides.  The northern boundary of the property
(i.e., the boundary of the upland portion over which the Corps does
not assert jurisdiction (see Gov't Br. 45)) abuts South River Road,
which runs roughly parallel to the Clinton River.  The western
boundary of the property runs along Jefferson Avenue.  The southern
portion of the property is, on the other hand, bounded not by a paved
street but by more wetlands (see also Pet. App. 24a).  The road south
of those wetlands, the Metrolpolitan Parkway, is some 1300 feet south
of Riverside's property.  Finally, and of greatest significance, is
the location of the north-south road to the east of Riverside's
property, Venetian Drive.  Between the eastern boundary of Riverside's
property and that road lie some 3300 feet of additional wetlands.
Moreover, at its southern terminus, Venetian Drive dead ends at Black
Creek;  it does not connect with the Metropolitan Parkway's eastern
terminus.  Stated differently, the "ring of paved public streets" is
unmistakably broken, permitting direct access across Riverside's
wetlands and wetlands owned by others to Black Creek through a
sizeable outlet of open water (not merely a marsh) that does not
require crossing "paved streets," man-made dikes or drains, or any
other feature relied upon by Riverside to convey the impression that
its property is unconnected to any navigable water.  /2/

   B. Riverside also asserts (Br. 4, 31) that its property was
actively farmed for close to 60 years, or until 1955.  In addition to
the fact that historic use is irrelevant to a current determination of
wetlands jurisdiction, the record citation that Riverside relies upon
does not bear out its contention.  The witness, who was 75 years old
at the time of trial (1/21/77 Tr. 3), testified that he saw corn on
the property when he was about 10 years old (id. at 6).  Thereafter,
he testified only that he and his father cut hay on the property
during World War II (id. at 7);  he did not testify to any other
farming activity occurring at that time or at any subsequent time.
/3/ Although there is some evidence that row crops were cultivated on
the property as late as 1940 (J.A. 31;  1/21/77 Tr. 99-101), the only
"agricultural" activity on the property in the 1950s was the mowing of
grass (J.A. 87;  see also 1/21/77 60-61 (no agricultural use of the
property since at least 1951).  To our knowledge, mowing grass does
not constitute farming.  In any event, farming, be it mowing grass,
cutting hay, or more traditional agricultural activities, is not
inconsistent with the status of the property as a wetland covered by
Section 404.  J.A. 37, 59-60.  Indeed, the evidence shows that,
notwithstanding the very limited farming activities in the distant
past, the property has been a wetland since at least 1873 (J.A. 17-18;
 1/15/77 Tr. 153-155) and has been consistently used for trapping and
hunting muskrats and waterfowl and for spear fishing by bow and arrow
(see, e.g., J.A. 51-54, 64-71).

   C. Riverside further asserts (Br. 4) that the portions of the
property that were not farmed were heavily wooded by oak and maple
trees that are still in existence today.  Riverside's record citation
for this contention is the confusing testimony of one witness that he
observed one dead oak tree and another tree that may or may not have
been an oak but had been pushed over by prior filling activities
(Resp. Br. App. 3a-4a).  In addition, the cited testimony suggests
that the dead oak tree and the other unidentified tree were located on
the upland portion of Riverside's property, over which the Corps does
not assert jurisdiction.  In any event, none of the maps and
photographs in the record suggests that the property (with the
possible exception of a very small area in the northern, upland
portion) is heavily wooded.  Finally, the maple trees on Riverside's
property are a wetland species of vegetation.  J.A. 33, 56.

   D. Riverside also contends (Br. 31) that its property is partially
developed with sidewalks, sewers, and fire hydrants.  The only
testimony in the record with respect to sidewalks is that of George
Short, the sole owner of Riverside Bayview Homes, Inc., to the effect
that sidewalks were "down on Macomber Street" when the property was
platted in 1916 (J.A. 85).  Riverside neglects to point out, however,
that Macomber Street runs only through the upland portion of its
property not covered by Section 404 (see PX 23 (S. Ct. Exh. 4), App.,
infra);  nothing in the record suggests that there are any sidewalks
on the wetland portion of the property.  With respect to sewers and
fire hydrants, the record contains testimony that the filling
operation that would be necessary for Riverside to carry out its
development plans would bury the sewers and fire hydrants, thereby
rendering them useless (see 1/17/77 Tr. 64 ("(I)f they filled this
area, they would have to extend the fire hydrants and manhole covers
up in the air.")).  The record also contains testimony that the fire
department has been unable to put out marsh fires on Riverside's
property because the area was too muddy for the fire trucks to enter
(1/21/77 Tr. 61-63).

   E. In short, as we explained in our opening brief (at 44-48), the
southern portion of Riverside's property has exhibited the wetland
characteristics of aquatic vegetation and saturated (sometimes
flooded) conditions for decades (J.A. 56, 64-65, 70;  1/15/77 Tr. 59),
and the visual evidence before this Court (J.A. 118;  App., infra)
demonstrates beyond cavil that the property is adjacent to navigable
waters of the United States.  Riverside's contention that its property
is nothing more than an "unconnected low-lying area()" (Br. 38) is
totally contradicted by the evidence of record.

   II. A. Riverside contends (Br. 22) that the term "navigable waters"
as used in the Clean Water Act refers only to "the navigable waters of
the United States, non-navigable portions of those waters and
tributaries." According to Riverside (ibid.), the only "wetlands" that
Congress intended to regulate under the CWA are those that
"constitut(e) part of the foregoing waterbodies." Reduced to its
essentials, Riverside's argument amounts to a contention that Congress
did not intend to regulate adjacent wetlands at all, because such
wetlands, by definition, are not part of any of the enumerated water
bodies, but are instead the marshes, swamps, and bogs adjacent to
those water bodies.  /4/ In light of the legislative history of the
1977 amendments to the CWA, this contention is untenable (see Gov't
Br. 22-27 and pages 13-14, infra).

   Riverside's confusion clearly stems from its erroneous assumption
(Br. 16-22) that those waters subject to federal regulatory control
under the Commerce Clause are the same as, and no broader than, those
waters subject to federal regulation for the purpose of protecting or
improving navigation.  But this Court has clearly recognized that the
limits of Congress's Commerce Clause powers are in no way
circumscribed by factors relating to navigation.  See Kaiser Aetna v.
United States, 444 U.S. 164, 177-174 (1979).  As the Court there
stated (id. at 174 (emphasis added)), "a wide spectrum of economic
activities 'affect' interstate commerce and thus are susceptible of
congressional regulation under the Commerce Clause irrespective of
whether navigation, or, indeed, water, is involved." In this case,
therefore, Riverside's reference to the waters regulated by the United
States for purposes of navigation sheds no light on congressional
intent with respect to the areas -- be they traditional waters or
wetlands -- that Congress intended to regulate when exercising its
Commerce Clause powers to their "constitutional limit" (see, e.g., 118
Cong. Rec. 33699 (1972);  S. Rep. 95-370, 95th Cong., 1st Sess. 75
(1977)).  Indeed, one would have to make the wholly unwarranted and
truly fanciful assumption that Congress was unaware of the broad sweep
of its regulatory powers under the Commerce Clause in order to accept
Riverside's contention that Congress believed the full extent of its
constitutional power over water was in any way circumscribed by the
interests of navigation.

   Moreover, conspicuously absent from Riverside's enumeration of the
waters it believes Congress intended to regulate is any attempt to
correlate those waters with the purposes of the Clean Water Act.  It
is, of course, axiomatic that a statute must be interpreted in light
of the purposes Congress sought to achieve.  See, e.g., Dickerson v.
New Banner Institute, Inc., 460 U.S. 103, 118 (1983).  As we
demonstrated in our opening brief (at 19-27, 33-39), the Corps'
definition of wetlands, which attaches no significance to the source
of water inundating or saturating an area characterized by wetlands
vegetation, is fully consistent with both congressional and scientific
understanding of the many valuable services performed by wetlands.
See also id. at 25 n.17.

   Riverside's only response to these concerns is to argue that the
government is seeking "to expand the CWA into the equivalent of a
national wetlands preservation act" (Br. 42).  But the legislative
history of the 1977 amendments to the CWA unequivocally demonstrates
congressional recognition of the importance of wetlands.  Congress
clearly understood that wetlands adjacent to large areas of open water
such as Lake St. Clair perform vital hydrologic support functions in
the aquatic ecosystem, including natural drainage, organic and mineral
nutrient exchange, sedimentation control, flushing, water
purification, provision of diverse fish and waterfowl habitat required
for all stages of life cycles, water current control, and flood water
storage.  See, e.g., 123 Cong. Rec. 26697 (1977) (remarks of Sen.
Muskie);  id. at 26718-26719 (remarks of Sen. Baker);  Institute for
Water Resources, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Research Report 79-R1,
Wetland Values -- Concepts and Methods for Wetlands Evaluation (1979)
(hereinafter cited as Wetland Values).  And to the extent that federal
regulation of wetlands may produce an incidental effect on local land
use decisions (see Resp. Br. 43), that result is merely a necessary
by-product of Congress's decision to control discharges into waters of
the United States, including wetlands.  It no more invades the
province of the states than does implementation of the Surface Mining
Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, 30 U.S.C. 1201 et seq.  See Hodel
v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Ass'n, 452 U.S. 264, 283-293
(1981).  /5/

   B. Riverside and its amici argue that the court of appeals'
"frequent flooding" test will ensure the presence of a "hydrologic
connection" between traditional water bodies and those adjacent
wetlands that Congress may have intended to regulate under Section
404.  This is true enough, but it should be obvious that "frequent
flooding," which was never mentioned in the legislative history of the
1972 Act or the 1977 amendments and is nowhere to be found in the
Corps' regulations, is not the only means by which to establish such a
"hydrologic connection."

   Although we disagree with the extremely narrow concept of
"hydrologic connection" espoused by Riverside and its amici, we do not
take serious issue with the proposition that wetlands, to be
considered "adjacent" to a water body (see 33 C.F.R. 323.2(d)), should
have some functional relationship with the water body.  But that
relationship may take any number of forms, including "frequent
flooding," a visible surface water connection, a ground water
connection, or, more generally but equally pertinent, an areal
relationship that recognizes the interrelated nature of all waters,
including wetlands, in a single aquatic ecosystem.  Wetland Values
26-27.  (By a single aquatic ecosystem, we mean all waters, including
wetlands, within a geographically proximate hydrologic regime that
support interrelated and interacting communities of plants or animals
(see 40 C.F.R. 230.3(c)).

   Precise quantification of the relationships within an aquatic
ecosystem and the relative importance of particular wetlands requires
highly sophisticated techniques and instruments beyond the scope of
most threshold jurisdictional inquiries conducted by the Corps.
Wetland Values 26.  See also Fish & Wildlife Service, U.S. Dep't of
the Interior, Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the
United States 23 (1979) (technical data describing hydrologic
characteristics of water regimes, including wetlands, is seldom
available).  Accordingly, the Corps invokes the concept of "adjacency"
as a regulatory tool to identify waters in the same aquatic ecosystem;
 stated differently, the Corps employs a sort of administrative
presumption that a wetland in close geographic proximity to an open
water body affects interstate commerce by virtue of its relationship
to that water body and is therefore within the class of wetlands that
Congress intended to regulate.  On the other hand, no such presumption
attaches in the case of "isolated" waters, including wetlands;  in
such cases, the Corps assumes the case-by-case burden of demonstrating
that the use, degradation, or destruction of isolated waters,
including wetlands, could affect interstate commerce (33 C.F.R.
323.2(a)(3)).

   The regulatory classification of wetlands into the categories of
"adjacent" and "isolated" is an essential tool for the effective
implementation of the statute.  As noted, establishing a hydrologic
connection is often a time-consuming and expense process.  /6/ Were
the Corps forced to abandon the logical presumption inherent in the
adjacency test at the threshold jurisdicitonal stage, many wetlands
that Congress intended to regulate could be destroyed before the Corps
had an opportunity to evaluate the impact of a particular proposal
during the permit review process.  In this case, for example,
Riverside refused to comply with a cease and desist order issued by
the Corps, and the United States was forced to seek a temporary
restraining order and a preliminary injunction to halt Riverside's
fill operation until the Corps could evaluate Riverside's proposal.
/7/ In this and other enforcement actions, refusal to permit the Corps
to engage in a presumption of a hydrologic association and an
interstate commerce nexus based on adjacency clearly would thwart
Congress's goals.

   The Corps recognizes, however, that not every wetland performs
equally important environmental functions.  Even "adjacent" wetlands
vary in their environmental significance, depending on a number of
variables.  E.g., Wetland Values 27.  These variables are fully
considered in the permit review process (see, e.g., 40 C.F.R.
230.6(a), 230.10(b)-(d), 230.11).  To require their consideration and
definitive resolution earlier, at the threshold jurisdictional stage,
would, as noted, result in the unwarranted degradation or destruction
of many environmentally significant wetlands.  Accordingly, the Corps'
"adjacency" regulation, as broadly defined above in accordance with
sound scientific principles, should be upheld as a reasonable
administrative approach to Riverside's "hydrologic connection"
argument.  /8/

   C. As we demonstrated in our opening brief (at 22-25), Congress in
1977 clearly ratified the Corps' interpretation of its jurisdiction
under Section 404.  While Riverside correctly notes (Br. 35-36) that
Congress was dissatisfied with certain aspects of the Corps' Section
404 program, it ignores the fact that Congress engaged in a
comprehensive reexamination of every facet of that program and decided
to cure the objectionable features by exempting specific activities
from Section 404's permit requirements;  on the other hand, Congress
expressly declined to adopt an amendment to limit the Corps'
interpretation of the geographic reach of Section 404.  Congress
understood exactly what it was doing (cf. Heckler v. Day, No. 82-1371
(May 22, 1984), slip op. 7-12);  it unequivocally rejected the
interpretation urged by Riverside.  Contrary to Riverside's argument
(Br. 36), therefore, this case does not involve an ordinary claim of
legislative acquiescence through silence, nor is it simply a case of
reliance on post-enactment remarks by individual legislators.  /9/

   D. As we have demonstrated here and in our opening brief, the
Corps' regulations reasonably interpret congressional intent, and the
court of appeals erred in substituting its own construction of the
statute and the regulations for that of the agency.  Riverside's
response is to argue (Br. 29) that no deference is due the Corps'
interpretation because it has not been consistent.  Notably, Riverside
never acknowledges that the ultimate administrative responsibility for
defining "waters of the United States" rests with EPA (see Gov't Br.
18 n.11), and that agency has demonstrated unwavering consistency in
its interpretation and implementation of the CWA.  Moreover, the only
"inconsistency" on the part of the Corps was rectified in response to
the order in NRDC v. Callaway, 392 F. Supp. 685 (D.D.C. 1975) (see
Gov't Br. 5-6);  since that time, the Corps has never deviated from
the interpretation of the CWA it advances in this Court.  Indeed, it
is only by blinding itself to any distinction between proposed
regulations and duly promulgated final regulations that Riverside is
able to advance its claim of "inconsistency" on the part of the Corps.
 But the notion that an agency's interpretation of a statute is
undeserving of deference whenever it makes changes to proposed rules
undermines the very purpose of notice and comment rulemaking.  In any
event, "(a)n initial agency interpretation is not instantly carved in
stone.  On the contrary, the agency, to engage in informed rulemaking,
must consider varying interpretations and the wisdom of its policy on
a continuing basis." Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. NRDC, No. 82-1005 (June
25, 1984), slip op. 25.

   III. Finally, Riverside argues (Br. 41, 46-50) that if the CWA does
permit the regulation of "adjacent wetlands" as defined by the Corps,
then the Act is an unconstitutional delegation of legislative
functions and violates the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment.
Neither contention has any merit.  /10/

   A. Congress may constitutionally delegate to an administrative
agency the responsibility for effectuating legislative policy so long
as it sets general standards sufficient to provide the agency with an
intelligible principle for guidance.  See, e.g., FEA v. Algonquin SNG,
Inc., 426 U.S. 548, 559 (1979);  Carlson v. Landon, 342 U.S. 524,
542-544 (1952).  Congress's delegation of authority to the Corps (and
the EPA) under the CWA easily satisfies this test.  Avoyelles
Sportsmen's League, Inc. v. Marsh, 715 F.2d 897, 916 (5th Cir. 1983).

   In determining whether Congress has provided sufficient standards,
it is appropriate to look to statutory context and legislative history
to add gloss to a broad grant of legislative authority.  See
Industrial Union Dep't, AFL-CIO v. American Petroleum Institute, 448
U.S. 607, 675-676 (1980) (Rehnquist, J., concurring).  The stated
goals of the CWA (restoration of the integrity of the Nation's waters
and elimination of discharges of pollutants into those waters, 33
U.S.C. 1251(a)), the legislative history's guidance that "waters of
the United States" be construed to the constitutional limit to
accomplish those goals, and the 1977 legislative history relating
specifically to Section 404 collectively provide an intelligible
standard to guide the Corps' assertion of regulatory jurisdiction.
/11/ This Court has recognized that "'(n)ecessity . . . fixes a point
beyond which it is unreasonable and impractical to compel Congress to
prescribe detailed rules.'" FEA v. Algonquin SNG, Inc., 426 U.S. at
560 (quoting American Power & Light Co. v. SEC, 329 U.S. 90, 105
(1946)).  The specificity demanded by Riverside would exceed that
point, and its delegation argument should be rejected.

   B. Riverside's argument that the Corps' assertion of regulatory
jurisdiction over wetlands of the type found on its property amounts
to an unconstitutional taking of private property reflects a failure
to distinguish between the mere assertion of regulatory jurisdiction
over wetlands and the decision to grant or deny a permit.  This Court
recently reaffirmed the principle that taking claims are premature
until a landowner receives a final decision regarding how or whether
he will be permitted to develop his property.  Williamson County
Regional Planning Comm'n v. Hamilton Bank, No. 84-4 (June 28, 1985),
slip op. 17.  The Court also reaffirmed the principle that taking
claims against the federal government are premature until the
landowner has availed himself of the process for seeking just
compensation provided by the Tucker Act, 28 U.S.C. 1491.  Williamson
County, slip op. 20-21.  Riverside has not done so.

   Accordingly, the proposition (Resp. Br. 16, 50) that a statute
susceptible to more than one interpretation should be construed so as
to avoid a taking of private property is inapposite here.  In United
States v. Security Industrial Bank, 459 U.S. 70, 77-78, 82 (1982), the
Court concluded that Congress did not intend to apply a provision of
the Bankruptcy Code retroactively in part because, if it were so
applied, the statute would effect a taking on its face for private
purposes.  Here, on the other hand, the assertion of CMA jurisdiction
merely triggers a permit requirement for certain polluting activities,
not a taking of any property right.

   In an attempt to overcome the problems with its taking argument,
Riverside asserts (Br. 48) that a determination of wetlands
jurisdiction is invariably tantamount to a permit denial.  /12/
Riverside grossly misrepresents reality by its claim (Br. 4a) that
"the criteria contained in the Corps' regulations relative to the
granting of a permit in a wetland area assure that a permit will be
denied" /13/ Riverside apparently bases this misstatement on its
erroneous assumption (Br. 48) that the Section 404 regulations
effectively require the denial of a permit for any project that does
not need to be located in, or in close proximity to, the aquatic
environment.

   In fact, an applicant for a nonwater-dependent activity covered by
Section 404 may instead show a lack of environmentally preferable
practicable alternatives (33 C.F.R. 320.4(b)(4);  40 C.F.R.
230.10(a));  the showing required is inversely related to the degree
of potential adverse impact from a proposed activity (see 40 C.F.R.
230.6(a)).  Although a permit application for a nonwater-dependent
activity necessitates a more persuasive showing regarding the lack of
alternatives than does an application for a water-dependent activity,
this distinction imposes only a heightened factual burden.  For
example, in Louisana Wildlife Federation v. York, 761 F.2d 1044,
1047-1048 (5th Cir. 1985), the court of appeals approved the Corps'
issuance of permits allowing the conversion of 5,200 acres of wetlands
to agricultural use (a nonwater-dependent activity), notwithstanding a
claim that the permit applicants had failed to make the necessary
showing concerning the lack of alternatives.  The court held that
under the Corps' regulations and EPA'S guidelines, the Corps was
permitted, and indeed had the duty, to consider the objectives of the
project and the economic feasibility and logistics of alternatives.
761 F.2d at 1048.  See also Hough v. Marsh, 557 F. Supp. 74, 83 (D.
Mass. 1982) (finding of water dependency is not a prerequisite to
filling wetlands under Section 404, but it is a factor to be
considered in the application process).  On this record, therefore,
there is no support for Riverside's argument that the mere assertion
of regulatory jurisdiction amounts to a taking.

   For the foregoing reasons, as well as those stated in our opening
brief, the judgment of the court of appeals should be reversed.

   Respectfully submitted.

   CHARLES FRIED

      Acting Solicitor General

   OCTOBER 1985

   /1/ The exhibits in this case are in considerable disarray,
apparently because the district court clerk's office misplaced them
for a number of years.  It is our understanding that they were never
sent to the court of appeals, and that court appears to have decided
the case without benefit of any of the exhibits.  When the government
requested the transfer of the exhibits to this Court, the district
court clerk's office was unable to locate all of them, and thus this
Court does not have all of the exhibits in the case.  Additional
confusion has been generated by the fact that the district court
clerk's office renumbered the exhibits it did have before transmitting
them to this Court.  In some instances, it is not possible to
determine the former exhibit number, thus making it difficult to
correlate the trial testimony with particular exhibits.  Where
correlation is possible, we shall employ a parallel citation form,
citing first to the original exhibit number at trial and, in
parentheses, to the new number assigned to the exhibit in this Court.

   In any event, it is our view that the most informative exhibits are
PX 1 and PX 23 (S. Ct. Exh. 4), and these exhibits are reproduced,
respectively, at J.A. 118 and App., infra. PX 23 (S. Ct. Exh. 4) is a
USGS topographic map of the quadrangle that includes Riverside's
property;  to make reproduction possible in this brief, we have
cropped the map to delete those portions of the quadrangle that are
quite distant from Riverside's property.

   /2/ PX 23 (S. Ct. Exh.4) was made in 1968 and revised in 1973, with
the revisions shown in purple (App., infra).  The southern portion of
Riverside's property, over which the Corps asserts jurisdiction, as
well as the surrounding wetlands to the south and east, is dotted with
the topographer's symbol for marshes.  App., infra;  1/15/77 Tr.
167-168.  Thus, Riverside's contention (Br. 31) that flood protection
activities undertaken by the Corps in 1973 are responsible for
creating the wetland conditions that now dominate its property is
totally contradicted by the abundance of marsh symbols on the 1968
topographic map and the absence of any revisor's changes to the map in
1973.  See also Gov't Br. 47-48 n.41.  It is also worth noting that a
USGS map prepared in 1952 (PX 22 (S. Ct. Exh. 17)) likewise shows
marsh symbols all over the southern portion of Riverside's property
(see also J.A. 43-44).

   /3/ Riverside also cites (Br. 4) to DX 25, 26, and 27, in support
of its assertion that the property was actively farmed until at least
1955.  Unfortunately, these exhibits are not available to the Court;
they appear to be among the exhibits lost by the district court
clerk's office.  To the best of our knowledge, all three exhibits are
Department of Agriculture aerial depictions of the property, one made
in 1940 and the other two in 1955.  Without the exhibits themselves,
it is of course impossible to ascertain what they show about past uses
of the property.  We note, however, that there was testimony at trial
that only DX 26, the 1940 depiction, suggested the possibility of
farming activity.  The quality of DX 25 and 27 (the 1955 depictions),
on the other hand, was too poor to indicate what use was being made of
the property (1/13/77 Tr. 51-52).

   /4/ Although the Section 404 program also encompasses "isolated"
wetlands, i.e., wetlands such as prairie potholes (see North Dakota v.
United States, 460 U.S. 300, 304 n.4 (1983)), the regulatory standards
for the Corps' assertion of jurisdiction over isolated wetlands differ
from those applicable to adjacent wetlands.  See 33 C.F.R.
323.2(a)(2), (3), and (7).  This case, however, does not involve the
regulation of "isolated" wetlands;  instead, the Corps asserts
jurisdiction over Riverside's property on the basis of its
"adjacency," or geographic proximity, to open water bodies.  See pages
10-11, infra.

   /5/ Riverside's additional argument (Br. 43-44 & n.46) that
Congress intended federal jurisdiction over wetlands to be construed
narronly because it wanted to leave wetland regulation entirely to the
states is all the more unsound in light of Section 404(g)(1) of the
CWA, 33 U.S.C. 1344(g)(1).  In that Section, Congress expressly
specified the maximum extent to which it was willing to empower the
States to administer the Section 404 program, incl ding wetland
regulation.  Judicial creation of a greater role for the states would
completely rewrite the statute.  (We note that the decision of 20
states, including Michigan, to support the United States in this case
as amici curiae further belies Riverside's argument.)

   Finally, the fact that wetlands may be adversely affected by
activities not regulated under Section 404 and the existence of other
federal programs that provide different types of protection for
wetlands than does Section 404 (see Resp. Br. 45) do not support
Riverside's argument for a narrow construction of Section 404.
Riverside cites no authority for the proposition that Congress must
address every facet of wetlands protection in a single statute;
indeed, the existence of multiple statutes dealing with wetlands only
underscores the importance that Congress attaches to their protection.

   /6/ Riverside takes issue (Br. 32-33) with our position (Gov't Br.
40-44) that an easily-applied threshold test for Section 404
jurisdiction benefits both landowners and regulators alike, contending
that wetlands determinations are inherently difficult and that
satisfying the court of appeals' "frequent flooding" requirement
therefore adds nothing to the complexity of a wetlands determination.
In fact, however, the Corps' draft manual, U.S. Corps of Engineers,
Dep't of the Army, Wetlands Delineation Manual, Doc. No. Y-84 (Draft
1985) (upon which Riverside relies for its claim of complexity), has
not been officially adopted by the Corps, does not even address the
issue of hydrologic connections, and, more importantly, states that
"(i)n most cases, the combination of available office data and
relatively simple, rapidly applied, onsite methods will be sufficient"
to make a wetlands determination.  Id. at 48.  These methods "usually
(do) not require collection of quantitative data" of the sort that so
perplexed the district court (See Pet. App. 25a-31a).  Delineation
Manual at 112.

   /7/ Riverside complains (Br. 32) that the permit review process
itself is burdensome and time-consuming.  Riverside's own case,
however, which began with the submission of an incomplete application,
is not typical.  The Corps advises us that the average time for
processing permit applications is currently 70 days.  Nevertheless,
burdens on individual permit applicants are of concern to the Corps,
and, pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1344(q), the Corps has adopted various
measures to streamline interagency review of permit applications.
Finally, a substantial number of actions that would otherwise require
individual Section 404 permit applications are instead automatically
authorized by "general" permits issued by regulation.  See 33 U.S.C.
1344(e)(1);  33 C.F.R. Pt. 330.

   /8/ It is important to note that the outer limits of what may
properly constitute a "hydrologic connection" need not be defined in
this case.  The maps and photographs of record (PX 1 (J.A. 118);  PX
23 (S. Ct. Exh. 4), App., infra) clearly demonstrate an open water
connection between Riverside's marsh and the navigable waters of Black
Creek.  Using any sensible approach to the problem, this connection
clearly satisfied the "hydrologic connection" requirement urged by
Riverside.  Moreover, the district court's finding that there was no
hydrologic connection between Riverside's property and the adjacent
water bodies (Pet. App. 32a-37a) clearly referred only to the absence
of a subsurface flow from the adjacent water bodies to Riverside's
property.  Whether or not this finding is clearly erroneous (as we
suspect it is) is irrelevant in the face of the visible surface water
connection.  See also Gov't Br. 8 n.7.

   Finally, it should be noted that the Corps has discarded proposed
regulations (48 Fed. Reg. 21474 (1983)) that would have amended the
definition of "adjacent" to require, in addition to geographic
proximity, "a reasonably perceptable (sic) surface or subsurface
hydrologic connection to a water of the United States." The proposal
was abandoned in the face of adverse comments, particularly from EPA
(which bears ultimate administrative responsibility for defining
"waters of the United States").  The commentors feared that the Corps'
proposal would be read too narrowly, so as to exclude from the
"hydrologic connection" concept those geographically proximate
wetlands that perform the functions of concern to Congress even in the
absence of a readily-ascertainable surface or subsurface connection to
open water bodies.

   /9/ Equally without merit is Riverside's suggestion (Br. 36-37 n.
39) that congressional ratification of the Corps' program, if any, was
limited to the Corps' 1975 interim final regulations and did not
encompass the final regulations promulgated in 1977.  The 1977
regulations were promulgated before the pertinent legislative debates,
and Congress was aware of those regulations (see, e.g., Gov't Br. 24).
 In any event, Riverside erroneously argues (Br. 37 n.39) that the
1975 regulations encompassed only those freshwater wetlands created by
periodic inundation from a contiguous or adjacent navigable water.
This interpretation is not traceable to the 1975 regulatory language,
and the 1975 regulations were never so construed by the Corps.  As
with the 1977 regulations, the Corps' position was that the source of
water -- be it overflow from adjacent water bodies, rainwater, ground
water, or storm water runoff -- was irrelevant.  See Affidavit of
William N. Hedeman, Jr. (Dist. Ct. Docket Entry No. 14).

   /10/ Riverside never raised the delegation argument in the lower
courts, and those courts had no occasion to pass on it.  Accordingly,
this Court should decline to consider the issue.  See, e.g., County of
Oneida v. Oneida Indian Nation, No. 83-1065 (Mar. 4, 1985), slip op.
16-17.

   /11/ The Corps' promulgation of regulations defining "waters of the
United States" does not warrant the conclusion that an
unconstitutional delegation has occurred.  "The power of an
administrative agency to administer a congressionally created . . .
program necessarily requires the formulation of policy and the making
of rules to fill any gap left, implicitly or explicitly, by Congress."
Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. NRDC, slip op. 5 (quoting Morton v. Ruiz, 415
U.S. 199, 231 (1974)).  Furthermore, it is immaterial that such
gap-filling regulations clarify a term that determines jurisdiction
under the Act.  See Bayside Enterprises, Inc. v. NLRB, 429 U.S. 298,
303-304 (1977);  NLRB v. Hearst Publications, Inc., 322 U.S. 111, 130
(1944).

   With respect to the Corps' authority to grant or deny permits,
which Riverside also suggests (Br. 41) is an unconstitutional
delegation of legislative power, the CWA sets forth quite specific
criteria.  See 33 U.S.C. 1344(b);  33 U.S.C. 1343;  Avoyelles
Sportsmen's League, Inc. v. Marsh, 715 F.2d at 916;  Gov't Br. 21
n.12.

   /12/ At the same time, Riverside recognizes (Br. 49), as it must,
that the determination whether a permit denial amounts to a taking
requires a factual inquiry.  Thus, Riverside's taking argument must be
rejected for the additional reason that it can point to no evidence
supporting its assertion (ibid.) that without a permit there is no
alternative economic use of its property;  there simply was no inquiry
in the courts below into possible alternative uses of Riverside's
property.  Riverside's assertions (Br. 47-48) that the only use for
the wetlands portion of its property is as a housing subdivision and
that agricultural use is neither economically viable nor compatible
with the site improvements (i.e., the sewers and fire hydrants
discussed at pages 5-6, supra) are totally without record support.

   /13/ In fact, only a small number -- approximately 2.7% -- of all
Section 404 permit applications are denied.  Office of Technology
Assessment, Congress of the United States, OTA-0-206, Wetlands:  Their
Use and Regulation 143-144 (1984).  The Corps grants 50% of Section
404 permit applications without significant modification, and 33% are
granted with substantial modifications intended to reduce adverse
project impacts.  Id. at 12.  In 1980-1981, the Corps authorized
projects that resulted in the conversion to other uses of about 50% of
the wetlands acreage for which permits were sought.  Id. at 11,
144-145.

                               Appendix
