
MARCH 1998
U.S. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS
Statistical Area TIGER/Line

Census TIGER and TIGER/Line are registered trademarks of the U.S. Bureau of the Census.

WHAT'S NEW

The Statistical Area TIGER/Line files include updates from the Redistricting Data Program,
Phase I, the Block Boundary Suggestion Program (BBSP), the 1997 Boundary and Annexation
Survey, and other Census Bureau programs that update the TIGER data base. It is important to
note that even though each TIGER/Line file represents a whole county, all new features in existence 
may not have been added in this release. The extent of updates in any given county will vary by 
program, number of participants, type of participant, time of participation, and a  participant's 
degree of participation in a program. 

USING THIS CD-ROM

The Statistical Area TIGER/Line CD-ROMs contain digital cartographic data files and related
documentation. The files include the counties, parishes, boroughs, census geographic areas, and
equivalent entities for each state (or territory).  

The data is organized in subdirectories by county (or county equivalent) within a state. Each
state subdirectory is named using the two-digit FIPS code and the Post Office abbreviation for
the state (ex. 02_AK for Alaska). Within the state subdirectory each county file has the name
TGRssccc.ZIP, where the "ss" is the FIPS state code and "ccc" is the county FIPS code.  

The data for each county is stored in this single compressed file that when decompressed results
in up to 17 separate files representing each of the TIGER/Line record types that exist for that
county.  Some counties did not require all of the 17 record types and therefore will have less than
17 files. 

If the types of data contained in record types 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 and Z are not appropriate for a given
county then the files for those record types will not be included.  The name of each of these files
uses a modification of the above convention (TGRssccc.RTx) where "x" is the Record Type. 
Appendix A of the documentation provides a list of counties and their FIPS codes by state.   

Information on the content of each record type can be found in Chapter 6 of the TIGER/Line
documentation.  Information on decompressing the data files is found below under the heading
DATA DECOMPRESSION.  

The files use the TIGER/Line record formats as described in the accompanying
documentation.  When decompressed they are fixed length ASCII with record separators (carriage
return, line feed).  The CD-ROM is in ISO 9660 format.  Users with PCS will require Microsoft
CD-ROM Extensions Version 2.0 or higher.

This CD-ROM does not contain software to display or generate maps.  Nor is the data on this
CD-ROM in the form of a map image.  To create maps with the data on this CD-ROM, one
would typically use a Geographic Information System package or other mapping software.  For
information on how to use the TIGER/Line data with a specific package contact the company that produced the package. For information on companies that sell products that use
TIGER/Line data or that provide various TIGER/Line-related services refer to the "Vendor's
List" on the TIGER Page at the Census Bureau's World Wide Web site described below.

ADDITIONAL CONTENTS OF THE CD-ROM:

COUNTSss.TXT

Each CD-ROM contains COUNTSss.TXT files in the subdirectory for each state under the
TIGER directory.  The COUNTSss.TXT files show record type file record counts by county 
for all states that are included on the compact disk.  Note that all counties are listed for a given
state.  The layout of COUNTSss.TXT is  as follows:

FIPS state code         16:17
FIPS county code       20:22
Creation date            25:30
Record type               33:33
Record Count             36:43

README.TXT

The document that you are presently reading.

WHERE.TXT

This file describes a variety of places from where one can download software to decompress the
TIGER/Line data files on this disk.  Software exists for a variety of platforms including DOS,
Windows, Macintosh, and UNIX.

DOCUMENTATION

The documentation for the TIGER/Line files is contained in the DOC subdirectory.  The file
name is TIGER97B.PDF and is provided in the PDF format which requires the ADOBE(TM)
Acrobat 3.0 reader.  We are including the installation software for both the Windows 3.1 (16bit)
and the Windows 95 (32bit) versions of the reader.  They are included in the "WIN31" and
"WIN95" subdirectories under the "DOC/ADOBE" directory. 

To install one of these versions, copy the software from the appropriate subdirectory on the
CD-ROM on to a subdirectory on your hard drive (which you named ADOBE or some other
name).  This program will install the ADOBE Acrobat reader on the hard drive of your computer. 
When the installation is complete you can view the TIGER/Line documentation by running the
ADOBE reader and selecting the TIGER97B.pdf file from the "Open" menu.

PARTICIPANT STATISTICAL AREAS PROGRAM GUIDELINES

The documentation for the Participant Statistical Areas Program guidelines is contained in the
DOC subdirectory.  The file name for the guidelines is PSAPGUIDE.txt.  The guidelines provide
participants with detailed instructions and assistance in submitting specific statistical areas as
part of the Census 2000 Participant Statistical Areas Program. Please review all guidelines for
which you are interested in submitting plans.  Please note that chapters 9 & 10 of the guidelines
include specific instructions on creating, and transmitting a polygon equivalency file to the
Census Bureau.

DATA COMPRESSION

The TIGER/Line data on this disk has been compressed into an archive file to save space and
reduce the number of disks required for the data.  If the files were not compressed it would
require over 40 CD-ROM disks to hold the data needed to cover the entire United States.  Use
software compatible with PK-ZIP 1.93A or higher to decompress the data.

Info-ZIP's software (Zip, Unzip and related utilities) are examples of packages that can be used. 
The Info-ZIP software is free and can be obtained as source code or executables from various
bulletin boards and on line services software archive sites such as those listed in the
WHERE.TXT file on this disk.

KNOWN PROBLEMS AND ANOMALIES WITH THIS TIGER/LINE DATA SET:

MISSING ZIP+4 RECORDS

In the current release of the TIGER/Line 1997 files, data users may note a significant reduction
in the number of ZIP+4 Add On Codes in Record Type Z (ZIP4L and ZIP4R fields) for some
areas.  This reduction occurs as a result of operations to update the TIGER data base in
preparation for Census 2000.  These operations may replace address ranges or change the 5-digit
ZIP Code, but do not automatically update or transfer the ZIP+4 codes to the new ranges. 
Because the Add On codes are valid for specific 5-digit ZIP Codes and address ranges, the
previous Add On codes may no longer apply to the new address ranges.

In nearly all situations, an automated match between the Census TIGER data base and the USPS
ZIP+4 file is the source of ZIP+4 Add On Codes in TIGER products.  With update operations
for Census 2000 underway for large portions of the nation, we have not yet performed this
automated match to refresh these codes.  Future releases of TIGER/Line will contain refreshed
codes that will reflect a more current USPS ZIP+4 file for the address range improvements that
we are now making.

ADDRESS ANOMALIES IN PUERTO RICO AND QUEENS COUNTY, N.Y.

The TIGER/Line files contain some address range coverage for Puerto Rico.  However, use of this
information for geocoding purposes may be problematic and the data user should proceed with
caution.  These address ranges are preliminary attempts at using Puerto Rico address ranges in
Census Bureau files.  Due to the lack of software or resources to handle some of the more unique
aspects of addressing in Puerto Rico, the address ranges were entered without the standard edits
and quality checks used in other parts of the United States.  Improvements in software and
address standardization for Puerto Rico are expected in the future.  At present,  there are 
inconsistencies, overlaps, and duplication of address ranges.  Address ranges may lack alpha
character prefixes or have hyphenated prefixes. The files also lack the community names used in
a four-line address that the U.S. Postal Service requires to avoid duplicate addresses.  Errors in
the reference files, and other factors may limit the usefulness of this product for geocoding
purposes. 

Address range data for Queens County, NY in TIGER/Line does not show a consistent use of
hyphenated and non-hyphenated addressing.  The Census Bureau intends to correct this in future
versions of TIGER products.

ROAD FEATURE ANOMALIES

The Census Bureau extracts TIGER/Line files from the TIGER data base which is in continual
update.  We created some TIGER/Line files that were in process for update and in so doing
introduced some anomalies in chains represented in Record Types 1 and 2.  Road features may
appear in the TIGER/Line files unconnected to other road features (so-called floating features)
or severely skewed in relation to surrounding line features of any type.  This was the result of a
TIGER/Line file being created before normal Census Bureau correction operations.  The
disconnected or skewed features will be fixed before the next public product.

The following county files have the greatest likelihood of road feature anomalies:

FIPSCODE	County name, State	STCOU	County name, State
01073	Jefferson, AL	04013	Maricopa, AZ
06071	San Bernardino, CA	06073	San Diego, CA
08069	Larimer, CO	13089	DeKalb, GA
13121	Fulton, GA	13135	Gwinnett, GA
17077	Jackson, IL	18097	Marion, IN
21001	Adair, KY	21011	Bath, KY
21065	Estill, KY	21067	Fayette, KY
21095	Harlan, KY	21109	Jackson, KY
21131	Leslie, KY	21165	Menifee, KY
21175	Morgan, KY	21189	Owsley, KY
21203	Rockcastle, KY	22017	Caddo, LA
24003	Anne Arundel, MD	24035	Queen Anne's, MD
26093	Livingston, MI	26115	Monroe, MI
26125	Oakland, MI	26147	St. Clair, MI
26161	Washtenaw, MI	26163	Wayne, MI
34003	Bergen, NJ	36029	Erie, NY
36055	Monroe, NY	37119	Mecklenburg, NC
42003	Allegheny, PA	42007	Beaver, PA
42019	Butler, PA	42071	Lancaster, PA
42125	Washington, PA	42129	Westmoreland, PA
45031	Darlington, SC	45057	Lancaster, SC
45071	Newberry, SC	46099	Minnehaha, SD
47037	Davidson, TN	48229	Hudspeth, TX
48453	Travis, TX	50003	Bennington, VT
50007	Essex, VT	50015	Lamoille, VT
50021	Rutland, VT	55025	Dane, WI


NAMING STANDARDS IN RECORD TYPE 1

The Census Bureau changed its naming standards in Record Type 1 affecting the data in the
Feature Direction, Prefix (FEDIRP), Feature Name (FENAME), Feature Type (FETYPE), and
Feature Direction, Suffix (FEDIRS) fields.  In previous TIGER/Line products, directional
prefixes and suffixes could appear for any type of line feature.  For the TIGER/Line 1997, only
road features, those features with a Census Feature Class Code (CFCC) in the A class, should
have feature directional data in the directional fields.  Other types of chains representing other
types of features (for example, hydrologic features in CFCC class H) no longer are standardized
to show directional information.

The Census Bureau also modified the extraction of feature directional, name, and type
information to improve the standardization of road feature information.  The improvement parses
a greater number of road chains into the correct feature identifier fields.


INTERNAL POINT PLACEMENT ERRORS

We discovered that some polygons in TIGER have an internal point that falls outside the
polygon.  This occurred for highly irregular polygons.  When linking  data to the internal
point users may find that it will  not appear within the correct polygon in all cases.  The
Census Bureau will fix this error in subsequent TIGER/Line products. 


QUESTIONS AND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Technical questions about the Census TIGER/Line files and future plans for this and other
TIGER-related products may be directed to the Products and Services Staff of the Geography
Division at (301) 457-1128 or to the e-mail address tiger@census.gov.  In addition to this
Statistical Areas version of TIGER/Line the Census Bureau also produces a version of
TIGER/Line for public sale and a variety of related products based on TIGER data.  General 
information about these products is available from the TIGER page on the Census Bureau's
World Wide Web site (http://www.census.gov/ftp/pub/geo/www/tiger/).  This Web site also
is a source of information that is of specific interest to TIGER/Line users and of general
interest regarding the geographic programs at the Census Bureau.  As appropriate, additional
information about this product will be posted, such as ERRATA or USER NOTES.

There is a TIGER Special Interest Group (SIG) which meets at various professional
conferences in an informal setting to discuss issues relating to the use of TIGER/Line and
future developments.  Announcements telling the location of upcoming TIGER SIG meetings
is posted on the TIGER Web page. There also is a list of vendors that provide services or
products related to TIGER/Line.
