

UNITED STATES INFORMATION AGENCY

301 Fourth Street SW., Washington, DC 20547

Phone, 202-619-4700

Director  ........Joseph D. Duffey

Deputy Director  ........Penn Kemble

Counselor  ........Donna M. Oglesby

Director, Office of Civil Rights  ........Hattie P. Baldwin

Inspector General  ........Marian C. Bennett

General Counsel  ........Les Jin

Director, Office of Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs  ........Douglas Wilson

Director, Office of Public Liaison  ........Michael D. Schneider, Acting

Director, Office of Research  ........Ann T. Pincus

Deputy Director  ........Stephen M. Shaffer

Associate Director for Broadcasting  ........Joseph B. Bruns, Acting

Deputy Associate Director  ........Joseph B. Bruns

Chief of Staff  ........Janie Fritzman

Senior Adviser  ........Joyce Kravitz

Director, Office of Administration  ........Dennis D. Sokol

Director, Office of Personnel  ........Janice H. Brambilla

Director, Office of Budget and Planning  ........Earl Klitenic

Director, Office of Policy  ........Steve Munson

Director, Office of External Affairs  ........Joseph D. O'Connell, Jr.

Director, Office of Engineering and Technical Operations  ........Robert Kamosa

Director, Voice of America  ........Geoffrey Cowan

Director, Office of Television and Film Service  ........Charles W. Fox III

Director, Office of Cuba Broadcasting  ........Richard Lobo

Director, Radio Marti  ........Rolando Bonachea

Director, TV Marti  ........Antonio Dieguez

Associate Director for Policy and Programs  ........Robert A. Powers, Acting

Deputy Associate Director  ........(vacancy)

Executive Assistant  ........Joel Anthony Fischman

Director, Office of Policy Guidance  ........James T.L. Dandridge II

Director, International Exhibits Service  ........Stephen G. Sinclair, Acting

Director, Office of Program Coordination and Development  ........C. Anthony Jackson

Director, Foreign Press Centers  ........Phillip C. Brown

Director, Press and Publications Service  ........John Dwyer, Acting

Executive Officer  ........Nellie C. Nelson

Associate Director for Educational and Cultural Affairs  ........Barry Fulton, Acting

Deputy Associate Director  ........Barry Fulton

Executive Director, Cultural Property Staff  ........Marie Papageorge Kouroupas

Staff Director, J. William Fulbright Foreign Scholarship Board  ........Ralph H. Vogel

Director, Office of Cultural Centers and Resources  ........James Hogan

Director, Office of Citizen Exchanges  ........Robert Schiffer

Director, Office of International Visitors  ........Karl Olsson, Acting

Director, Office of Academic Programs  ........Thomas Spooner, Acting

Director, Office of Arts America  ........Robin Blerrington

Director, Office of Policy and Evaluation  ........David Michael Wilson

Executive Officer  ........Robert R. Gouding, Acting

Associate Director for Management  ........Richard T. Stephens, Acting

Deputy Associate Director  ........Richard T. Stephens

Director, Office of Administration  ........Eileen Keane Binns

Director, Office of Technology  ........Daniel S. Campbell

Director, Office of Personnel  ........Harlan F. Rosacker

Comptroller, Office of the Comptroller  ........Stanley M. Silverman

Director, Office of Security  ........Bernard C. Dowling

Director, Office of Contracts  ........Phillip R. Rogers

Executive Officer  ........Daniel D. Dunning

Director, Washington Relocation Project  ........William Jones

Director, Office of African Affairs  ........Robert LaGamma

Deputy Director  ........Cornelius Walsh

Director, Office of American Republics Affairs  ........Donald R. Hamilton

Deputy Director  ........Louise Crane

Director, Office of East Asian and Pacific Affairs  ........Jodie Lewinsohn

Deputy Director  ........George F. Beasley

Director, Office of West European and Canadian Affairs  ........John P. Harrod

Deputy Director (Western Europe and Canada)  ........Jacob Gillespie

Director, Office of East European and NIS Affairs  ........Anne M. Sigmund

Deputy Director  ........Morris E. Jacobs

Director, Office of North African, Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs  ........Kent D. Obee

Deputy Director  ........Thomas Homan

[For the United States Information Agency statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 22, Part 504]

@U1

 [Insert United States Information Agency chart]@U0

The United States Information Agency (USIA) is responsible for the U.S. Government's overseas information and cultural and academic programs, including the Voice of America. The Agency, which is known overseas as the U.S. Information Service, conducts a wide variety of communication activities -- from academic and cultural exchanges to press, radio, television, film, seminar, library, and cultural center programs abroad -- in order to strengthen foreign understanding of American society, obtain greater support of U.S. policies, and increase understanding between the United States and other countries. The Agency reports to the President and the Secretary of State on worldwide public opinion as it is relevant to the formulation and application of U.S. foreign policy.

          The legislative mandates of the United States Information Agency derive from the United States Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948 (22 U.S.C. 1431), and the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2451). The U.S. Information and Educational Exchange Act's purpose is to increase mutual understanding between the people of the United States and the people of other countries. It prohibits, with certain exceptions approved by Congress, dissemination within the United States of materials produced by the Agency for distribution overseas. It also requires the Agency to make its overseas program materials available for public inspection at its Washington, DC, headquarters. The Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act authorizes educational and cultural exchanges between the United States and other countries as well as United States participation in international fairs and expositions abroad.

Activities

          The objectives of USIA are:

           -- to promote and strengthen international understanding of and support for United States policies and actions;

           -- to advance democratic and free market values, processes, and institutions;

           -- to foster mutual understanding between the people of the U.S. and other peoples by means of the exchange of individuals and ideas;

           -- to serve as a reliable and authoritative source of U.S., world, and regional news through its broadcasting mandate;

           -- to encourage international discussion and cooperation on fundamental concerns such as arms proliferation, trade and investment, conflict resolution, drug abuse, the global environment, human rights, and terrorism;

           -- to advise the President, Secretary of State, and other key officials on the implications of foreign public opinion for U.S. policies and interests; and 

           -- to strengthen U.S. capacity to engage effectively in world affairs by facilitating greater U.S. private-sector involvement in international educational, cultural, and informational activities.

          To accomplish its purposes, the Agency conducts a variety of activities overseas -- educational and cultural exchanges, English-teaching programs, television, radio, and film programs, Wireless File, book distribution, exhibits, and library and cultural center programs. The Agency offers facilitation to foreign press and television journalists working overseas and in the United States and to American journalists overseas.

          The Agency conducts programs for the international exchange of students, teachers, and other educators. It brings leaders in government, politics, social welfare, and other professional fields to the United States to consult with their counterparts, observe American society and institutions, convey an understanding of their own cultures, and develop their particular fields of interest. Through all these programs, the Agency seeks to enlarge the circle of those able to serve as influential interpreters between the United States and other nations, encourage key institutions to strengthen their contacts across national boundaries, and reduce impediments to the exchange of ideas and information. It administers a program through which American groups and individuals in the performing arts and athletics are sent abroad to perform, advise, and consult with their professional colleagues in other societies.

          The Agency also is charged with advising the President, the President's representatives abroad, and the various departments and agencies on the implications of foreign opinion for present and contemplated United States policies, programs, and official statements.

          Abroad, the head of each Agency post, the Public Affairs Officer, provides the Ambassador and other members of the U.S. diplomatic mission with professional advice and expertise on all matters relating to the work of the Agency.

Functional Elements

          The four major functional elements of the Agency are: the Bureaus of Broadcasting, Policy and Programs, Educational and Cultural Affairs, and Management.

Bureau of Broadcasting The Bureau of Broadcasting consists of the Voice of America, the Office of Cuba Broadcasting, and the Television and Film Service.

          The Voice of America (VOA) is the Bureau of Broadcasting's functional element for worldwide radio broadcasting. VOA operates in accordance with the act of January 27, 1948, as amended (22 U.S.C. 1463) which requires that it serve as a consistently reliable, authoritative, accurate, objective, and comprehensive news source. It must present a balanced and comprehensive projection of significant American thought and institutions. VOA produces and broadcasts radio programs in English and 46 foreign languages for overseas audiences, and to over 2000 affiliate stations worldwide. Its programming includes world and regional news, reports from correspondents on the scene, analyses of worldwide events, feature programs, music, and editorials.

          The Office of Cuba Broadcasting is located within the Voice of America. It oversees all programming broadcast for Cuba on VOA's Radio Marti and TV Marti programs. In keeping with the principles of the VOA charter, both services offer their audiences accurate and objective news reports and features on American culture and opinion. Radio Marti broadcasts on medium and shortwave frequencies. TV Marti is available on VHF (very high frequency) and international satellite.

          The Television and Film Service is responsible for organizing and directing the Bureau of Broadcasting's worldwide television and film activities. The areas of responsibility encompass: producing programs and interactive press conferences for the WORLDNET satellite delivery system; newsfiles in English, Spanish, French, Arabic, Ukranian, and Russian; producing and acquiring films and videotapes for direct projection or placement overseas; providing facilitative assistance to visiting foreign television and film producers; operating television news bureaus at foreign press centers; providing assistance to foreign broadcasters in the production and telecast of cooperative television programs; serving as the Bureau's primary point of contact with American motion picture and television industries; and coordinating with other U.S. and foreign government agencies on the dissemination of information overseas through motion pictures and television.

Bureau of Policy and Programs The Bureau of Policy and Programs comprises the Agency's Policy Guidance Office and four major offices responsible for most of USIA's information production and support services, including: the Wireless File, a daily press service dating back to 1935; 4 regular periodicals, appearing in 19 languages; pamphlets and other special publications, in over 40 languages; the U.S. Speakers and Professionals-in-Residence Programs; teleconference programs, including the use of new digital video technology; Foreign Press Centers in Washington, New York, and Los Angeles; and USIA's International Exhibits Service. 

          The Bureau will terminate on September 30, 1994, and most of its functions will be incorporated into new management structures of the Policy and Planning Unit and the Bureau of Information.

          The Office of Policy Guidance provides direction on policy issues for overseas posts and operating elements of the Agency. The Office also develops USIA's public diplomacy plans, maintains interagency liaison on key policy concerns, advises on foreign public opinion, and assists in clarifying issues and developments and in countering misinformation about the United States.

          The Press and Publications Service supports U.S. foreign policy objectives overseas through a variety of press articles, periodicals, pamphlets, photos, and other visual materials. It produces the Wireless File, a press service which transmits daily to overseas posts texts of major speeches and official Government statements, analytical and background articles explaining foreign policy and domestic developments, selected materials from U.S. publications, and reports from correspondents on developments pertinent to foreign audiences. The Wireless File is produced in English, Russian, Arabic, French, and Spanish. The Press and Publications Service also produces special thematic pamphlets and 4 magazines in 19 languages. Additionally, the Press and Publications Service manages printing and translation facilities in Manila.

          The Office of Program Coordination and Development recruits U.S. speakers to explain U.S. policies and society to overseas audiences, both in person and through electronic media from the United States. The speakers address a wide variety of political, economic, and social subjects. The Office also recruits Professionals-in-Residence as consultants to media outlets, government ministries, parliaments, and other organizations promoting the development of democratic institutions. Also, sports experts travel abroad to assist foreign sports organizations.

           The Foreign Press Centers in Washington, DC, New York, and Los Angeles assist foreign journalists by sponsoring press conferences and policy briefings by U.S. officials and outside experts, conducting thematic tours, and providing general facilitative assistance. Both resident correspondents and hundreds of others who visit the United States annually benefit from these services. 

          The International Exhibits Service is responsible for developing, producing, and managing exhibits and multimedia presentations. Using an array of audiovisual tools, the Service gives millions of people overseas a graphic view of American life and an appreciation for our country's policies, history, and values.

Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs The Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs administers programs authorized by the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961 (the Fulbright-Hays Act), including academic exchanges, short-term professional exchanges, youth exchanges, cooperative projects with private organizations; and overseas book, library and English teaching programs. It also provides staff support for the Presidentially appointed J. William Fulbright Foreign Scholarship Board and for the Cultural Property Advisory Committee. The Bureau consists of five major offices:

          The Office of Academic Programs develops and coordinates a wide variety of academic educational exchange programs. It oversees the administration of more than 7,000 grants each year to U.S. citizens to study, teach, and conduct research abroad, and for foreign nationals to conduct similar activities in the United States. The best known of the exchanges supported by this office is the Fulbright Program which operates in more than 120 countries. The Office of Academic Programs also supports a worldwide information network about education opportunities in the United States, and programs which enchance the experiences of foreign students enrolled in U.S. colleges and universities. The Office also encourages and supports American studies at foreign universities and other institutions of higher learning.

          The Office of International Visitors arranges informative visits to the United States for more than 5,000 influential foreign leaders each year in such fields as government, economics, labor, journalism, the arts, and education. Selected individuals, who are nominated by United States Information Service posts, travel throughout the country meeting counterparts in their fields of interest. They also meet with Americans in their homes or other informal settings. The Office also manages the Agency's two reception centers; serves as the Agency's liaison with the large network of public and private organizations involved in the international visitor program; and arranges programs in the United States for United Nations fellows and foreign government trainees.

          The Office of Citizen Exchanges provides funding to American nonprofit institutions for international exchange and training programs which support agency goals and objectives. Nonprofit institutions may submit proposals only in response to requests for proposals (RFP's) published by the Office, and these proposals are judged among others in the competition. Programs usually involve professional, nonacademic exchanges -- often with study tours, workshops, and internships as key components, and taking place in multiple phases overseas and in the United States. Emphasis is usually on nontechnical themes such as democracy-building, journalism, the role of government, or conflict resolution. The Office also administers all high school exchange programs sponsored by USIA, including major special initiatives in East Europe and the former Soviet Union, and the Congress-Bundestag program with Germany.

          The Office of Cultural Centers and Resources provides policy direction, program support, and professional guidance and materials to United States Information Service libraries and binational centers overseas; provides library services to domestic Agency offices; promotes the publication of American books translated and reprinted in English; provides grants for a donated-books program; supports English-teaching programs abroad; and publishes the English Teaching Forum quarterly. 

          The Office of Arts America administers fine and performing arts programs, sending performing arts groups and fine arts exhibitions on overseas tours. Arts America identifies and recruits speakers and specialists in the fields of literature, film, and the visual and performing arts to speak at or work with host country institutions in their fields of expertise. The Office also awards grants to American nonprofit institutions involved in the international exchange of performing and visual artists and encourages linkages between U.S. and foreign cultural institutions. Arts America also represents the Agency in the Fund for U.S. Artists at International Festivals and Exhibitions.

          The Office of Policy and Evaluation provides policy analysis, coordination, and evaluation of the activities and programs of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs. The Office is responsible for advising the Associate Director on conceptual approaches to the Bureau's activities and on the development and implementation of its policies. It coordinates activities with the Bureau to ensure consistency of approach; evaluates the success, strengths, and weaknesses of programs; and provides staff support to the Cultural Property Advisory Committee, which advises the Director on U.S. efforts to curb illicit trade in artifacts.

Management The Bureau of Management is responsible for planning, organizing, directing, and controlling the Agency's administrative and management operations. The Bureau's offices provide support services in the areas of administration, advanced technology, personnel and training, budget and fiscal operations, management analysis, security, contracts, and procurement.

Executive Level Offices

          The five executive level offices of the Agency are the Office of Public Liaison, Office of the General Counsel, Office of Congressional Liaison, Office of the Inspector General, and the Office of Research.

          The Office of Public Liaison is charged with increasing awareness of and support for USIA in the United States, within the framework of agency legislation. Its mandate covers three principal functions: media relations, external affairs, and editorial services. The Office is responsible for planning, directing, coordinating, and evaluating USIA's domestic public affairs program. The Director of Public Liaison serves as the official spokesperson for the Agency within the United States and is the principal public affairs adviser to the Agency Director.

          The Office of General Counsel:

           -- provides general legal support, assistance, and representation to the Director and all elements of the Agency, both domestic and overseas, in all aspects of Agency operations;

           -- carries out the designation and supervisory authority of the Director with respect to international educational and cultural exchange visitor program sponsors; 

           -- makes recommendations on requests of alien exchange visitors for waiver of the 2-year home-country residence requirement of section 212(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended (8 U.S.C. 1182), and passes on all requests made under the Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts; and

           -- makes determinations to implement the act of October 19, 1965 (22 U.S.C. 2459), to render cultural objects imported for temporary exhibition immune from judicial seizure.

          The Office of Congressional Liaison and Intergovernmental Affairs is the principal point of contact for the Agency with Members of Congress and Office of Management and Budget legislative offices. It also is responsible for agency contact and outreach with State and local elected officials, who are  interested in and affected by transnational issues.

          The Inspector General, who reports to the Director, is authorized under the Inspector General Act of 1978 conducts independent audits, investigations, and inspections of USIA's domestic and overseas activities to prevent and detect waste, fraud, and abuse in the administration of these activities. The Office is responsible for preparing appropriate reports with recommendations, including referrals to the Attorney General on possible violations of Federal criminal or civil laws. Although the Inspector General is under the supervision of the Director of USIA, the Inspector General has independence in selecting activities to be reviewed. The Inspector General monitors compliance with recommendations and prepares reports to the Congress summarizing the activities of the Office. In addition, the Inspector General receives, evaluates, and investigates employee ``whistleblower'' complaints.

          The Office of Research conducts assessments of foreign attitudes and communications issues, analyzes foreign media commentary, and reports foreign media reactions. These activities are carried out daily in support of the Director's statutory role as adviser to the President, the Secretary of State, and the National Security Council on the impact of U.S. foreign policy decisions abroad. To provide program guidance on Agency activities, the Office also evaluates Agency programs at the request of the Director or Agency officials.

          The Office transmits research memos, reports, briefing papers, and daily and special media reaction reports to the White House, foreign affairs agencies, and other interested Government departments.

Counselor The Counselor of the Agency reports to the Director and Deputy Director. As the senior career officer in the Agency, the Counselor assists in the overall direction of the Agency and shares responsibility for establishing broad Agency policies and assuring their effective execution. The Counselor is a member of the Resource Management Committee and the Agency's core management group. The Counselor also oversees the activities of the five Area Directors.

Civil Rights The Office of Civil Rights (OCR) reports directly to the Agency Director and develops and administers Agency policies, practices, and procedures under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and related statutes and Executive orders which prohibit discrimination in programs and activities receiving Federal financial assistance. OCR develops policies and guidelines for the Agency's Federal Equal Opportunity Recruitment Program and directs, implements, and manages the Agencywide Equal Employment Opportunity and Affirmative Action Programs to assure equal opportunity for minorities, women, and individuals with disabilities. OCR oversees the review of policy implications of legislative proposals, new legislation, Executive orders, regulations, or administrative actions to determine their impact on USIA's civil rights functions; develops policies to provide equal employment opportunities for individuals with disabilities; and assures that qualified women, minorities, and individuals with disabilities are treated equitably in hiring, placement, and advancement.   

Geographic Areas The five geographic area offices are the principal Agency contacts with its overseas posts. They provide broad managerial oversight of the post's operations and programs, present area and post perspectives to the Agency Director, and relay requirements to functional support offices in Washington, DC. 

Overseas Posts

          Principally an overseas agency, the USIA's work is carried out by its foreign service officers and staff assigned to American missions abroad. Overseas posts engage in political advocacy of American foreign policy objectives and conduct communication, cultural, and educational exchange activities on behalf of the U.S. Government. The Agency maintains 204 posts in 127 countries.

Sources of Information

Administrative Regulations Inquiries regarding administrative staff manuals and instructions to staff affecting members of the public that were issued, adopted, or promulgated on or after July 5, 1967, should be directed to the Directives, Forms and Records Management Staff, United States Information Agency, Washington, DC 20547. Phone, 202-619-5680.

Contracts Contact the Office of Contracts, United States Information Agency, Washington, DC 20547. Phone, 202-205-5498.

Employment For information concerning employment opportunities, contact the Domestic Personnel Division, Office of Personnel, United States Information Agency, Washington, DC 20547. Phone, 202-619-4659. For Voice of America (VOA) and the Television and Film Service (WORLDNET TV) employment information, contact the Office of Personnel, Bureau of Broadcasting, United States Information Agency, Washington, DC 20547. Phone, 202-619-3763. For Office of Cuba Broadcasting, contact the Office of Personnel, Office of Cuba Broadcasting, United States Information Agency, Washington, DC 20547. Phone, 202-401-7114.

International Audiovisual Programs For information concerning a certification program under international agreement to facilitate the export and import of qualified visual and auditory materials of an educational, scientific, and cultural character, contact the Chief Attestation Officer of the United States, United States Information Agency, Washington, DC 20547. Phone, 202-475-0221.

For further information, contact the Office of Public Liaison, United States Information Agency, Washington, DC 20547. Phone, 202-619-4355.



UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION AGENCY

320 Twenty-first Street NW., Washington, DC 20523-0001

Phone, 202-647-1850

Director, U.S. International Development Cooperation Agency  ........J. Brian Atwood, Acting

Deputy Director  ........(vacancy)

AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

320 Twenty-first Street NW., Washington, DC 20523-0001

Phone, 202-647-1850

Administrator  ........J. Brian Atwood

Deputy Administrator  ........Carol Lancaster

Counselor  ........Kelly C. Kammerer

Chief of Staff  ........Richard L. McCall, Jr.

Executive Secretary  ........Aaron S. Williams

Assistant to the Administrator, Bureau for Policy and Program Coordination  ........Terrence J. Brown

Assistant Administrator for Management  ........Larry E. Byrne

Assistant Administrator for Africa  ........John Hicks

Assistant Administrator for Asia and the Near East  ........Margaret Carpenter

Assistant Administrator for Europe and the New Independent States  ........Thomas A. Dine

Assistant Administrator for Latin America and the Caribbean  ........Mark Schneider

Assistant Administrator for Humanitarian Response  ........Douglas M. Stafford

Assistant Administrator for Global Programs, Field Support and Research  ........Roxann A. VanDusen, Acting

Assistant Administrator for Legislative and Public Affairs  ........Jill Buckley

Director, Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization  ........Ivan R. Ashley

Director, Office of Equal Opportunity Programs  ........Jessalyn L. Pendarvis

General Counsel  ........Wandra G. Mitchell

Inspector General  ........Herbert L. Beckington

OVERSEAS PRIVATE INVESTMENT CORPORATION

1100 New York Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20527

Phone, 202-336-8400; Fax, 202-408-9859

President and Chief Executive Officer  ........Ruth R. Harkin

Executive Vice President  ........Christopher Finn

Senior Vice President, Policy and Investment Development  ........Richard L. Morningstar

Vice President and General Counsel  ........Charles D. Toy

Vice President and Treasurer  ........Mildred O. Callear

Vice President, Finance  ........Robert O. Draggon

Vice President, Insurance  ........Felton McL. Johnston

Vice President, Management Services  ........Richard K. Childress

Chairman of the Board  ........J. Brian Atwood

[For the Agency for International Development statement of organization, see the Federal Register of Aug. 26, 1987, 52 FR 32174]

@U1

 [Insert United States International Development Cooperation Agency chart]@U0

The United States International Development Cooperation Agency's function is policy planning, policymaking, and policy coordination on international economic issues affecting developing countries. The Agency's mission is twofold: first, to ensure that development goals are taken fully into account in all executive branch decisionmaking on trade, financing and monetary affairs, technology, and other economic policy issues affecting the less-developed nations; and second, to provide strong direction for U.S. economic policies toward the developing world and a coherent development strategy through the effective use of U.S. bilateral development assistance programs and U.S. participation in multilateral development organizations.

          The United States International Development Cooperation Agency (IDCA) was established by Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1979 (5 U.S.C. app.), to be a focal point within the Federal Government for economic matters affecting U.S. relations with developing countries. The Agency's function is policy planning, policymaking, and policy coordination on international economic issues affecting developing countries.

          The Director of the Agency serves as the principal international development adviser to the President and the Secretary of State, receiving foreign policy guidance from the Secretary of State. The Agency for International Development and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation are component agencies of the U.S. International Development Cooperation Agency.

Agency for International Development

          The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) administers U.S. foreign economic and humanitarian assistance programs in more than 100 countries in the developing world, Central and Eastern Europe, and the New Independent States of the former Soviet Union. The Agency functions under an Administrator, who is concurrently serving as the Acting Director of the U.S.  International Development Cooperation Agency.

Programs

          To meet the challenges of the post-Cold War era, USAID has redefined its mission and developed a strategy for achieving sustainable development in developing countries. The Agency supports programs in four areas: population and health, broad-based economic growth, environment, and democracy. USAID also provides humanitarian assistance and aid to countries in crisis and transition.

Population and Health USAID contributes to a cooperative global effort to stabilize world population growth and support women's reproductive rights. The types of population and health programs supported vary with the particular needs of individual countries and the kinds of approaches that local communities initiate and support. Most USAID resources are directed to the following areas: support for voluntary family planning systems, reproductive health care, needs of adolescents and young adults, infant and child health, and education for girls and women.

Economic Growth USAID promotes broad-based economic growth by addressing the factors that enhance the capacity for growth and by working to remove the obstacles that stand in the way of individual opportunity. In this context, programs concentrate on strengthening market economies, expanding economic opportunities for the disadvantaged in developing countries, and building human skills and capacities to facilitate broad-based participation.

Environment USAID environmental programs support two strategic goals: reducing long-term threats to the global environment, particularly loss of biodiversity and climate change; and promoting sustainable economic growth locally, nationally, and regionally by addressing environmental, economic, and developmental practices that impede development. Globally, USAID programs focus on the reducing sources and enhancing sinks of greenhouse gas emissions and on promoting innovative approaches to the conservation and sustainable use of the planet's biological diversity. The approach to national environmental problems differ on a country-by-country basis, depending upon a particular country's environmental priorities. Country strategies may include improving agricultural, industrial, and natural resource management practices that play a central role in environmental degradation; strengthening public policies and institutions to protect the environment; holding dialogs with country governments on environmental issues and with international agencies on the environmental impact of lending practices and the design and implementation of innovative mechanisms to support environmental work; and environmental research and education.

Democracy The Agency's strategic objective in the democracy area is the transition to and consolidation of democratic regimes throughout the world. Programs focus on some of the following types of problems: human rights abuses; misperceptions of democracy and free-market capitalism; lack of experience with democratic institutions; the absence or weakness of intermediary organizations; nonexistent, ineffectual, or undemocratic political parties; disenfranchisement of women, indigenous peoples, and minorities; failure to implement national charter documents; powerless or poorly defined democratic institutions; tainted elections; and the inability to resolve conflicts peacefully.

Humanitarian Assistance and Post-Crisis Transitions USAID provides humanitarian assistance that saves lives, reduces suffering, assists victims in returning to self-sufficiency, and reinforces democracy. Programs focus on disaster prevention, preparedness, and mitigation; timely delivery of disaster relief and short-term rehabilitation supplies and services; preservation of basic institutions of civil governance during disaster crisis; support for democratic institutions during periods of national transition; and increasing local capability to anticipate and handle disasters and their aftermath.

Overseas Organizations

          AID country organizations are located in countries where a bilateral program is being implemented. The in-country organizations are subject to the direction and guidance of the chief U.S. diplomatic representative in the country, usually the Ambassador. The organizations report to the Agency's Assistant Administrators for the four geographic bureaus -- the Bureaus for Africa, Asia and Near East, Europe and the New Independent States, and Latin America and the Caribbean.

          There are three types of country organizations: AID Missions, Offices of the AID Representative, and AID Sections of the Embassy. AID missions are located in countries in which the U.S. economic assistance program is major, continuing, and usually involves multiple types of aid in several sectors. Each Mission is headed by a Mission Director, who has been delegated program planning, implementation, and representation authorities. Offices of the AID Representative are located in countries where the economic assistance program is moderate, declining, or has limited objectives. The offices are usually headed by an AID Representative, who also has delegated authority for program implementation and representation. AID Sections of the Embassy are located in countries where the assistance program is nominal or is being phased out. Program planning and implementation authorities are delegated to the chief U.S. diplomatic representative who is assisted by the AID Affairs Officer.

          The overseas program activities, which involve more than one country, are administered by regional offices. These offices may also perform country organizational responsibilities for assigned countries. Generally, the offices are headed by a Regional Development Officer.

          Development Assistance Coordination and Representative offices provide liaison with various international organizations and represent U.S. interests in development assistance matters. Such offices may be only partially staffed by Agency personnel and may be headed by employees of other Federal agencies. 

---------------------------(TABLE START)---------------------------



Country Organizations -- Agency for International Development

Missions, Offices, or Sections of Embassy
head level 1 :Country
head level 1 :Officer in Charge\1\

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Albania/Tirana ....... Dianne M. Blane (OR)

Angola/Luanda ....... Keith Brown (CO)

Armenia/Yerevan ....... Suzanne Olds (OR)

Bangladesh/Dhaka ....... Richard Brown (MD)

Belize/Belize City ....... Barbara Sandoval (OR)

Benin/Cotonou ....... Thomas F. Cornell  (OR)

Bolivia/La Paz ....... Carl H. Leonard (MD)

Botswana/Gaborone ....... Howard R. Handler (MD)

Brazil/Brasilia ....... John Pielemeier (OR)

Burkina Faso/Ouagadougou ....... Thomas C. Luche (OR)

Bulgaria/Sofia ....... Gerald H. Zarr (OR)

Burundi/Bujumbura ....... Myron Golden (MD)

Cambodia/Phnom Penh ....... Lee A. Twentyman (OR)

Cameroon/Yaounde ....... Peter Benedict (MD)

Cape Verde/Praia ....... Barbara Kennedy (OR)

Chad/N'Djamena ....... Anne Williams (OR)

Chile/Santiago ....... Thomas Nicastro (OR)

Colombia/BogotaÿAE1 ....... Edward Kadunc (OR)

Costa Rica/San Jose ....... Stephen Wingert (MD)

Croatia/Zagreb ....... Michael Zak (OR)

Czech Republic/Prague ....... Lee D. Roussel (OR)

Dominican Republic/Santo Domingo ....... Marilyn Zak (MD)

Ecuador/Quito ....... John Sanbrailo (MD)

Egypt/Cairo ....... Henry Bassford (MD)

El Salvador/San Salvador ....... Charles E. Costello (MD)

Estonia/Tallinn ....... Adrian deGraffenreid (OR)

Ethiopia/Addis Ababa ....... Margaret Bonner (MD)

FYR Macedonia/Skopje ....... Linda Gregory (OR)

Gambia/Banjul ....... Rose Marie Depp (OR)

Ghana/Accra ....... Joseph B. Goodwin (MD)

Guatemala/Guatemala City ....... William Rhodes (MD)

Guinea/Conakry ....... Wilbur Thomas (MD)

Guinea-Bissau/Bissau ....... Michael F. Lukomski (OR)

Haiti/Port-au-Prince ....... Larry Crandall (MD)

Honduras/Tegucigalpa ....... Marshall Brown (MD)

Hungary/Budapest ....... David L. Cowles (OR)

India/New Delhi ....... Walter Bollinger (MD)

Indonesia/Jakarta ....... Charles F. Weden (MD)

Israel/Jerusalem (West Bank) ....... Karen Turner (AAO)

Israel/Tel Aviv (Gaza) ....... Harry Birnholz (AAO)

Jamaica/Kingston ....... Robert S. Queener (MD)

Jordan/Amman ....... William T. Oliver, Jr. (MD)

Kazakhstan/Almaty ....... Craig G. Buck (MD)

Kenya/Nairobi ....... John R. Westley (MD)

Latvia/Riga ....... Baudouin De Marcken (OR)

Lesotho/Maseru ....... F. Gary Towery (MD)

Liberia/Monrovia ....... Lowell Lynch (OR)

Lithuania/Vilnius ....... John Cloutier (OR)

Madagascar/Antananarivo ....... George Carner (MD)

Malawi/Lilongwe ....... Cynthia Rozell (MD)

Mali/Bamako ....... Charles Johnson (MD)

Mexico/Mexico City ....... Arthur Danart (OR)

Mongolia/Ulaanbaatar ....... William Nance (OR)

Morocco/Rabat ....... Martin Dagata (MD)

Mozambique/Maputo ....... Roger Carlson (MD)

Namibia/Windhoeck ....... Edward Spriggs (OR)

Nepal/Kathmandu ....... Philip Michael Gary (MD)

Nicaragua/Managua ....... Janet C. Ballantyne (MD)

Niger/Niamey ....... James Anderson (MD)

Nigeria/Lagos ....... Eugene Chiavaroli (AAO)

Oman/Muscat ....... Mark S. Matthews (OR)

Pakistan-Afghanistan/Islamabad ....... John Blackton (MD)

Panama/Panama City ....... Kevin Kelly (MD)

Papua New Guinea/Port Moresby ....... Paul Greenough (RD)

Paraguay/Asuncion ....... Richard Nelson (OR)

Peru/Lima ....... George Wachtenheim (MD)

Philippines/Manila ....... Thomas Stuckel (MD)

Poland/Warsaw ....... Donald Pressley (OR)

Romania/Bucharest ....... Richard J. Hough (OR)

Russia/Moscow ....... James A. Norris (MD)

Rwanda/Kigali ....... Dirk Djikerman, Acting (MD)

Senegal/Dakar ....... Douglas Sheldon, Acting (MD)

Slovakia/Bratislava ....... Patricia Lerner (OR)

Slovenia/Ljublana ....... Michael Zak (OR)

Somalia/Mogadishu ....... Mark Wentling (MD)

South Africa/Pretoria ....... Leslie A. Dean (MD)

South Pacific Regional/Fiji, Suva ....... David Leong, Acting (RD)

Sri Lanka/Colombo ....... David Cohen (MD)

Swaziland/Mbabane ....... Valarie Dickson-Horton (MD)

Tanzania/Dar es Salaam ....... Dale B. Pfeiffer (MD)

Thailand/Bangkok ....... Thomas H. Reese III (MD)

Thailand/Bangkok (ASEAN) ....... Dennis Zvinakis (OR)

Togo/LomeÿAE1 ....... Sarah C. Clark (OR)

Tunisia/Tunis ....... James A. Graham (MD)

Uganda/Kampala ....... Keith W. Sherper (MD)

Ukraine, Kieve ....... Terrence J. McMahon (MD)

Uruguay/Montevideo ....... Robert J. Asselin, Jr. (OR)

Yemen/Sanaa ....... William D. McKinney (OR)

Zaire/Kinshasa ....... Wayne King (AAO)

Zambia/Lusaka ....... Fred E. Winch (MD)

Zimbabwe/Harare ....... Ted D. Morse (MD)

Footnote: \1\MD: Mission Director; D: Director; OR: Office of the AID Representative; DO: Development Officer; RD: Regional Director; AAO: AID Affairs Officer for Section of Embassy; CO: Coordinator in Washington.

----------------------------(TABLE END)--------------------------

---------------------------(TABLE START)---------------------------



International Organizations -- Agency for International Development

(Selected Regional Organizations)

(A: Advisor; AID R: AID Representative; C: Counselor; ED: Executive Director; R: Representative; RD: Regional Director)
head level 1 :Country
head level 1 :Officer in Charge

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Regional Offices

Regional Economic Development Services Offices

 Office for East and Southern Africa -- Nairobi, Kenya ....... Fred C. Fisher (RD)

 Office for West and Central Africa -- Cote d'Ivoire, Abidjan ....... Williard Pearson (RD)

Regional Development Office/South Pacific -- Suva, Fiji ....... David Leong, Acting (RD)

Caribbean Regional Development Office -- Bridgetown, Barbados ....... Mosina H. Jordon (RD)

Development Assistance Coordination and Representation Offices

U.S. Mission to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture -- Rome, Italy ....... Hugh Smith (ED)

Office of the U.S. Representative to the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development -- Paris, France ....... Dennis Brennan (R)

Office of the AID Development Adviser to the U.S. Executive Director to the Asian Development Bank -- Manila, Philippines ....... Terry Barker (A)

U.S. Mission to the European Office of the United Nations and Other International Organizations -- Geneva, Switzerland ....... (Vacancy) (AID R)

AID Office for Development Cooperation -- Tokyo, Japan ....... Paul White (C)

----------------------------(TABLE END)--------------------------

Overseas Private Investment Corporation

[For the Overseas Private Investment Corporation statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 22, Chapter VII]

          The Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) is a self-sustaining, Federal agency whose purpose is to promote economic growth in developing countries by encouraging U.S. private investment in those nations. The Corporation assists American investors in three principal ways: financing investment projects through direct loans and/or guaranties; insuring investment projects against a broad range of political risks; and providing a variety of investor services. All of these programs are designed to reduce the perceived stumbling blocks and risks associated with overseas investment.

          Organized as a corporation and structured to be responsive to private business, OPIC's mandate is to mobilize and facilitate the participation of U.S. private capital and skills in the economic and social development of developing countries and emerging economies. Currently, OPIC programs are available for new business enterprises or expansion in some 140 countries worldwide. OPIC encourages American overseas private investment in sound business projects, thereby improving U.S. global competitiveness, creating American jobs and increasing U.S. exports. OPIC does not support projects that will result in the loss of domestic jobs or have a negative impact on the host country's environment or workers' rights. 

          The Corporation is governed by a 15-member Board of Directors -- 8 appointed from the private sector and 7 from the Federal Government.

Activities

          By reducing or eliminating certain perceived political risks for investors and providing financing and assistance not otherwise available, the Corporation helps to reduce the unusual risks and problems that can make investment opportunities in the developing areas less attractive than in advanced countries. At the same time, it reduces the need for government-to-government lending programs by involving the U.S. private sector in establishing capital-generation and strengthening private-sector economies in developing countries.

          The Corporation insures U.S. investors against the political risks of expropriation, inconvertibility of local currency holdings, and damage from war, revolution, insurrection, or civil strife. It also offers a special insurance policy to U.S. contractors and exporters against arbitrary drawings of letters of credit posted as bid, performance, or advance payment guaranties. Other special programs are offered for minerals exploration, oil and gas exploration, and development and leasing operations.

          The Corporation offers U.S. lenders protection against both commercial and political risks by guaranteeing payment of principal and interest on loans (up to $200 million) made to eligible private enterprises.

          Its Direct Investment loans, offered to small- and medium-sized businesses, generally cover terms of from 7 to 12 years, and usually range from $500,000 to $6 million with varying interest rates, depending on assessment of the commercial risks of the project financed.

          Programs are available only for a new facility, expansion or modernization of an existing plant, or technological or service products designed to generate investment which will produce significant new benefits for host countries.

Sources of Information

U.S. International Development Cooperation Agency

General Inquiries Inquiries may be directed to the Office of External Affairs, U.S. International Development Cooperation Agency, Washington, DC 20523-0001. Phone, 202-647-1850.

Agency for International Development

Congressional Affairs Congressional inquiries may be directed to the Bureau for Legislative and Public Affairs, Agency for International Development, Washington, DC 20523-0001. Phone, 202-647-8440.

Contracting and Small Business Inquiries For information regarding contracting opportunities, contact the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization, Agency for International Development, Washington, DC 20523-0001. Phone, 703-875-1551.

Employment For information regarding employment opportunities, contact the Workforce Planning, Recruitment and Personnel Systems Division, Office of Human Resources, Agency for International Development, Washington, DC 20523-0001. Phone, 202-663-2400. 

General Inquiries General inquiries may be directed to the Bureau for Legislative and Public Affairs, Agency for International Development, Washington, DC 20523-0001. Phone, 202-647-1850.

News Media Inquiries from the media only should be directed to the Press Relations Division, Bureau for Legislative and Public Affairs, Agency for International Development, Washington, DC 20523-0001. Phone, 202-647-4274.

Overseas Private Investment Corporation

General Inquiries Inquiries should be directed to the Information Office, Overseas Private Investment Corporation, 1100 New York Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20527. Phone, 202-336-8799.

Publications OPIC programs are further detailed in the Annual Report and the Program Summary. These publications are available free of charge.




UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMISSION

500 E Street SW., Washington, DC 20436

Phone, 202-205-2000

Chairman  ........Don E. Newquist

Vice Chairman  ........Peter S. Watson

Commissioners  ........Lynn M. Bragg, Carol T. Crawford, Janet A. Nuzum, David B. Rohr

Director of Operations  ........Robert Rogowsky

Director of Investigations  ........Lynn Featherstone

General Counsel  ........Lyn Schlitt

Executive Liaison  ........William T. Hart

Congressional Liaison  ........Charles Hansen

Chief Administrative Law Judge  ........Janet D. Saxon

Secretary  ........Donna R. Koehnke

Inspector General  ........Jane Altenhofen

Director, Office of Public Affairs  ........Margaret M. O'Laughlin

Director, Office of Economics  ........Peter Morici

Director, Office of Industries  ........M. Vern Simpson, Jr.

Division Chief, Agriculture and Forest Products  ........Cathy L. Jabara

Division Chief, Minerals, Metals and Miscellaneous Manufactures  ........Larry L. Brookhart

Division Chief, Energy, Chemicals, and Textiles  ........John J. Gersic

Division Chief, Machinery and Transportation  ........Aaron Chesser

Division Chief, Services and Electronics  ........Norman McLennan

Director, Office of Tariff Affairs and Trade Agreements  ........Eugene A. Rosengarden

Director, Office of Unfair Import Investigations  ........Lynn Levine

Director, Trade Remedy Assistance Office  ........Elizabeth Seltzer

Director, Office of Administration  ........Lorin Goodrich

@U1

 [Insert United States International Trade Commission chart]@U0

The United States International Trade Commission furnishes studies, reports, and recommendations involving international trade and tariffs to the President, the Congress, and other Government agencies. In this capacity, the Commission conducts a variety of investigations, public hearings, and research projects pertaining to the international policies of the United States.

          The United States International Trade Commission is an independent agency created by act of September 8, 1916 (39 Stat. 795), and originally named the United States Tariff Commission. The name was changed to the United States International Trade Commission by section 171 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2231). The Commission's present powers and duties are provided for largely by the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1654); the Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 U.S.C. 601); the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 (19 U.S.C. 1801); the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2101); the Trade Agreements Act of 1979 (19 U.S.C. 2501); and the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 (19 U.S.C. 2901).

          Six Commissioners are appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate for 9-year terms, unless appointed to fill an unexpired term. The Chairman and Vice Chairman are designated by the President for 2-year terms, and succeeding Chairmen may not be of the same political party. The Chairman generally is responsible for the administration of the Commission. Not more than three Commissioners may be members of the same political party (19 U.S.C. 1330).

Activities

          The Commission performs a number of functions pursuant to the statutes referred to above. Under the Tariff Act of 1930, the Commission is given broad powers of investigation relating to the customs laws of the United States and foreign countries; the volume of importation in comparison with domestic production and consumption; the conditions, causes, and effects relating to competition of foreign industries with those of the United States; and all other factors affecting competition between articles of the United States and imported articles. The Commission is required to make available to the President and to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and to the Committee on Finance of the Senate, whenever requested, all information at its command and is directed to make such investigations and reports as may be requested by the President or by either of said committees or by either branch of the Congress. The Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 amended several of the statutes administered by the Commission and, in addition, required the Commission to conduct several industry competitiveness investigations.

          In order to carry out these responsibilities, the Commission is required to engage in extensive research, conduct specialized studies, and maintain a high degree of expertise in all matters relating to the commercial and international trade policies of the United States.

Trade Negotiations The Commission advises the President as to the probable economic effect on the domestic industry and consumers of modification of duties and other barriers to trade that may be considered for inclusion in any proposed trade agreement with foreign countries (19 U.S.C. 2151).

Generalized System of Preferences The Commission advises the President with respect to every article that may be considered for preferential removal of the duty on imports from designated developing countries as to the probable economic effect the preferential removal of duty will have on the domestic industry and on consumers (19 U.S.C. 2151, 2163).

Industry Adjustment to Import Competition (Global Safeguard Actions) The Commission conducts investigations upon petition on behalf of an industry, a firm, a group of workers, or other entity representative of an industry to determine whether an article is being imported in such increased quantities as to be a substantial cause of serious injury or threat thereof to the domestic industry producing an article like or directly competitive with the imported article (19 U.S.C. 2251-2254). If the Commission's finding is affirmative, it recommends to the President the action that would address such injury and be most effective in facilitating positive adjustment by the industry to import competition. The President has discretion to take action that could be in the form of an increase in duties, imposition of a quota, negotiation of orderly marketing agreements, or provision of adjustment assistance to groups of workers, firms, or communities. If the President does not provide relief in the form recommended by the Commission, and if a joint resolution disapproving the action of the President is enacted by Congress, then the President is required to provide the relief recommended by the Commission (19 U.S.C. 2251-2254).

          The Commission reports with respect to developments within an industry that has been granted import relief and advises the President of the probable economic effect of the reduction or elimination of the tariff increase that has been granted. The President may continue, modify, or terminate the import relief previously granted.

Imports from NAFTA Countries (Bilateral Safeguard Actions) The Commission conducts investigations to determine whether, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a duty provided for under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), a Canadian article or a Mexican article, as the case may be, is being imported into the United States in such increased quantities and under such conditions so that imports of the article constitute a substantial cause of serious injury or (except in the case of a Canadian article) a threat of serious injury to the domestic industry producing an article that is like or directly competitive with the imported article (19 U.S.C. 3351-3356). If the Commission's determination is in the affirmative, the Commission recommends to the President the relief which is necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury. Such relief generally would take the form of the suspension of any further reduction in the rate of duty for such article from the subject country provided for in NAFTA, or an increase in the rate of duty on such article from such country to the lesser of the general column 1 rate of duty on such article or the column 1 rate of duty in effect immediately prior to the entry into force of NAFTA. Commission investigations under these provisions are similar procedurally to those conducted under the global safeguard action provisions.

Market Disruption From Communist Countries The Commission conducts investigations to determine whether increased imports of an article produced in a Communist country are causing market disruption in the United States (19 U.S.C. 2436). If the Commission's determination is in the affirmative, the President may take the same action as in the case of serious injury to an industry, except that the action would apply only to imports of the article from the Communist country. Commission investigations conducted under this provision are similar procedurally to those conducted under the global safeguard action provisions.

East-West Trade Monitoring System The Commission monitors imports into the United States from nonmarket-economy countries and makes a report at least once each calendar quarter on the effect of such imports on the production of like or directly competitive articles in the United States and on employment within the industry (19 U.S.C. 2240).

Imported Articles Subsidized or Sold at Less Than Fair Value The Commission conducts preliminary investigations under the Tariff Act of 1930 to determine whether there is reasonable indication of material injury to, threat of material injury to, or material retardation of the establishment of an industry in the United States by reason of imports of foreign merchandise allegedly being subsidized or sold at less than fair value (19 U.S.C. 1671, 1673, 1675). If the Commission's determination is affirmative, and the Secretary of Commerce further determines that the foreign merchandise is being subsidized or is being, or is likely to be, sold at less than its fair value, or there is reason to believe or suspect such unfair practices are occurring, then the Commission conducts final investigations to determine whether a U.S. industry is materially injured or threatened with material injury, or its establishment is materially retarded by reason of such imports.

          If the Secretary of Commerce determines to suspend an investigation upon acceptance of an agreement to eliminate the injurious effect of subsidized imports or imports sold at less than fair value, the Commission may conduct an investigation to determine whether the injurious effect of imports of the merchandise that was the subject of the suspended investigation is eliminated completely by the agreement. The Commission also conducts investigations to determine whether in light of changed circumstances such a suspension agreement continues to eliminate completely the injurious effect of imports of the merchandise.

          The Commission conducts investigations to determine whether changed circumstances exist that indicate that an industry in the United States would not be threatened with material injury, or the establishment of such an industry would not be materially retarded, if the countervailing duty order or antidumping order resulting from affirmative final determinations by the Commission and Secretary of Commerce were modified or revoked.

          With regard to imports of articles from countries not party to the Agreement on Interpretation and Application of Articles VI, XVI, and XXIII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Commission determines, with respect to any such duty-free article that the Secretary of Commerce has determined is being subsidized, whether an industry in the United States is materially injured or threatened with material injury, or its establishment is materially retarded by reason of such imports (19 U.S.C. 1303).

Import Interference With Agricultural Programs The Commission conducts investigations at the direction of the President to determine whether any articles are being or are practically certain to be imported into the United States under such conditions and in such quantities as to render or tend to render ineffective, or to materially interfere with, programs of the Department of Agriculture for agricultural commodities or products thereof, or to reduce substantially the amount of any product processed in the United States from such commodities or products, and makes findings and recommendations (7 U.S.C. 624). The President may restrict the imports in question by imposition of either import fees or quotas.

Unfair Practices in Import Trade The Commission applies U.S. statutory and common law of unfair competition to the importation of products into the United States and their sale (19 U.S.C. 1337). The statute declares unlawful unfair methods of competition and unfair acts in the importation or sale of products in the United States, the threat or effect of which is to destroy or substantially injure a domestic industry, prevent the establishment of such an industry, or restrain or monopolize trade and commerce in the United States. The statute also declares as unlawful per se infringement of a valid and enforceable U.S. patent, copyright, registered trademark, or maskwork; no resulting injury need be found. If the Commission determines that there is a violation of the statute, it is to direct that the articles involved be excluded from entry into the United States, or it may issue cease-and-desist orders directing the person engaged in such violation to cease and desist from engaging in such unfair methods or acts.

          Provision is made for the Commission to make certain public interest determinations that could result in the withholding of an exclusion or cease-and-desist order. The President may, within 60 days after the issuance of a Commission order, disapprove the order for policy reasons. Commission determinations of violation are subject to court review.

Uniform Statistical Data The Commission, in cooperation with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Commerce, establishes for statistical purposes an enumeration of articles imported into the United States and exported from the United States, and seeks to establish comparability of such statistics with statistical programs for domestic production (19 U.S.C. 1484).

          In conjunction with such activities, the three agencies are to develop concepts for an international commodity code for reporting transactions in international trade and to report thereon to the Congress (19 U.S.C. 1484).

Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, Annotated The Commission issues a publication containing the U.S. tariff schedules and related matters and considers questions concerning the arrangement of such schedules and the classification of articles (19 U.S.C. note prec. 1202, 1484).

International Trade Studies The Commission conducts studies, investigations, and research projects on a broad range of topics relating to international trade, pursuant to requests of the President, the House Ways and Means Committee, the Senate Finance Committee, either branch of the Congress, or on its own motion (19 U.S.C. 1332). Public reports of these studies, investigations, and research projects are issued in most cases.

          The Commission also keeps informed of the operation and effect of provisions relating to duties or other import restrictions of the United States contained in various trade agreements (19 U.S.C. 2482). Occasionally the Commission is required by statute to perform specific trade-related studies.

Tariff Summaries The Commission prepares and publishes, from time to time, a series of summaries of trade and tariff information (19 U.S.C. 1332). These summaries contain descriptions (in terms of the Tariff Schedules of the United States) of the thousands of products imported into the United States, methods of production, and the extent and relative importance of U.S. consumption, production, and trade, together with certain basic factors affecting the competitive position and economic health of domestic industries.

Sources of Information

          Inquiries should be directed to the specific organizational unit or to the Secretary, United States International Trade Commission, 500 E Street SW., Washington, DC 20436. Phone, 202-205-2000.

Contracts The Chief, Contracting and Procurement Division, has responsibility for contract matters. Phone, 202-205-2730.

Employment Information on employment can be obtained from the Director, Office of Personnel. The agency employs international economists, attorneys, accountants, commodity and industry specialists and analysts, and clerical and other support personnel. Phone, 202-205-2651.

Publications The Commission publishes results of investigations concerning various commodities and subjects; it also publishes a series of reports on chemicals. Other publications include Summaries of Trade and Tariff Information; an annual report to the Congress on the operation of the trade agreements program; and an annual report to the Congress of Commission activities. Specific information regarding these publications can be obtained from the Office of the Secretary.

Reading Rooms Reading rooms are open to the public in the Office of the Secretary and in the Commission Library.

For further information, contact the Secretary, United States International Trade Commission, 500 E Street SW., Washington, DC 20436. Phone, 202-205-2000.




UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE

475 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20260-0010

Phone, 202-268-2000

Board of Governors:  ........ 

Chairman of the Board  ........Sam Winters

Vice Chairman of the Board  ........Tirso del Junco, M.D.

Secretary of the Board  ........David F. Harris

Governors  ........Susan E. Alvarado, LeGree S. Daniels, Einar V. Dyhrkopp, Bert H. Mackle, Norma Pace, Robert Setrakian, (vacancy)

Postmaster General  ........Marvin Runyon

Deputy Postmaster General  ........Michael S. Coughlin

Management:  ........ 

Chief Operating Officer and Executive Vice President  ........Joseph R. Caraveo

Chief Financial Officer and Senior Vice President  ........Michael J. Riley

Chief Marketing Officer and Senior Vice President  ........William J. Henderson

Senior Vice President and General Counsel  ........Mary S. Elcano

Senior Vice President, Customer Service and Sales  ........Samuel Green, Jr.

Senior Vice President, Processing and Distribution  ........Peter A. Jacobson

Vice President, Consumer Advocate  ........Ann McK. Robinson

Vice President, Corporate Relations  ........Larry M. Speakes

Vice President, Diversity Development  ........Veronica O. Collazo

Vice President, Employee Relations  ........Suzanne J. Henry

Vice President, Engineering  ........William J. Dowling

Vice President, Facilities  ........Rudolph K. Umscheid

Vice President, Information Systems  ........Richard D. Weirich

Vice President, Labor Relations  ........Joseph J. Mahon, Jr.

Vice President, Legislative Affairs  ........Robert F. Harris

Vice President, Marketing Systems  ........Gail G. Sonnenberg

Vice President, Product Management  ........Allen R. Kane

Vice President, Purchasing  ........Darrah Porter

Vice President, Quality  ........Bernie Hylton, Acting

Vice President, Technology Applications  ........Robert A.F. Reisner

Judicial Officer  ........James A. Cohen

Chief Postal Inspector  ........Kenneth J. Hunter

Deputy Chief Inspector, Criminal Investigations  ........Jeffrey J. DuPilka

Deputy Chief Inspector, Operations Support  ........Recie Springfield, Jr.

Deputy Chief Inspector, Audit  ........Kenneth C. Weaver

[For the United States Postal Service statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 39, Parts 221-226]

@U1

 [Insert United States Postal Service chart]@U0

The United States Postal Service provides mail processing and delivery services to individuals and businesses within the United States. The Service is committed to serving customers through the development of efficient mail-handling systems and operates its own planning and engineering programs. It is also the responsibility of the Postal Service to protect the mails from loss or theft and to apprehend those who violate postal laws.

          The Postal Service was created as an independent establishment of the executive branch by the Postal Reorganization Act (39 U.S.C. 101 et seq.), approved August 12, 1970. The United States Postal Service commenced operations on July 1, 1971.

          The Postal Service has approximately 692,000 employees and handles about 171 billion pieces of mail annually. The chief executive officer of the Postal Service, the Postmaster General, is appointed by the nine Governors of the Postal Service, who are appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate for overlapping 9-year terms. The Governors and the Postmaster General appoint the Deputy Postmaster General, and these 11 people constitute the Board of Governors.

          In addition to the national headquarters, there are area and district offices supervising approximately 39,000 post offices, branches, stations, and community post offices throughout the United States.

Activities

          In order to expand and improve service to the public, the Postal Service is engaged in customer cooperation activities, including the development of programs for both the general public and major customers. The Consumer Advocate, a postal ombudsman, represents the interest of the individual mail customer in matters involving the Postal Service by bringing complaints and suggestions to the attention of top postal management and solving the problems of individual customers. To provide postal services responsive to public needs, the Postal Service operates its own planning, research, engineering, real estate, and procurement programs specially adapted to postal requirements, and maintains close ties with international postal organizations.

          A fundamental commitment of the Postal Service is to provide swift and reliable mail delivery. Activities designed to facilitate postal operations include maintenance and refinement of the postal rate structure, development of mail classification standards, and generation of internal information necessary for effective management of the postal enterprise.

          The Postal Service is the only Federal agency whose employment policies are governed by a process of collective bargaining. Labor contract negotiations, affecting all bargaining unit personnel, as well as personnel matters involving employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements, are administered by Labor Relations or Employee Relations.

          The United States Postal Inspection Service is the Federal law enforcement agency which has jurisdiction in criminal matters affecting the integrity and security of the mail, and operates as the Inspector General for the Postal Service. Postal Inspectors enforce more than 100 Federal statutes involving mail fraud, mail bombs, child pornography, illegal drugs, mail theft, and other postal crimes, as well as being responsible for the protection of all postal employees. Inspectors also audit postal contracts and financial accounts.

          There are 30 divisions, and information regarding postal law violations should be reported to the Postal Inspector in charge at the nearest division office.

---------------------------(TABLE START)---------------------------



Postal Inspection Service -- United States Postal Service
head level 1 :Division Office
head level 1 :Address
head level 1 :Telephone

-----------------------------------------------------------------

Atlanta, GA ....... P.O. Box 16489, 30321-0489 ....... 404-765-7369

Boston, MA ....... P.O. Box 2217, 02205-2217 ....... 617-654-5825

Buffalo, NY ....... 685 Ellicott Sq. Bldg., 14203-2545 ....... 716-856-3674

Charlotte, NC ....... 2901 I-85 South GMF, 28228-3000 ....... 704-329-9120

Chicago, IL ....... 433 W. Van Buren St., MPO, 60669-2201 ....... 312-765-4500

Cincinnati, OH ....... P.O. Box 14487, 45250-0487 ....... 513-684-5700

Cleveland, OH ....... P.O. Box 5726, 44101-0726 ....... 216-443-4000

Denver, CO ....... P.O. Box 329, 80201-0329 ....... 303-297-6220

Detroit, MI ....... P.O. Box 330119, 48232-6119 ....... 313-226-8184

Fort Worth, TX ....... P.O. Box 162929, 76161-2929 ....... 817-625-3411

Houston, TX ....... P.O. Box 1276, 77251-1276 ....... 713-238-4400

Kansas City, MO ....... Suite 850, 3101 Broadway, 64111-2416 ....... 816-932-0400

Los Angeles, CA ....... P.O. Box 2000, Pasadena, CA 91102-2000 ....... 818-405-1200

Memphis, TN ....... P.O. Box 3180, 38173-0180 ....... 901-576-2137

Miami, FL ....... 6th Fl., 3400 Lakeside Dr., Miramar, FL 33027-3242 ....... 305-436-7200

Newark, NJ ....... P.O. Box 509, 07101-0509 ....... 201-596-5400

New Orleans, LA ....... P.O. Box 51690, 70151-1690 ....... 504-589-1200

New York, NY ....... P.O. Box 555, James Farley Bldg., 10116-0555 ....... 212-330-3844

Philadelphia, PA ....... P.O. Box 7500, 19101-9000 ....... 215-895-8450

Phoenix, AZ ....... P.O. Box 20666, 85036-0666 ....... 602-223-3660

Pittsburgh, PA ....... 1001 California Ave., 15290-9000 ....... 412-359-7900

Richmond, VA ....... P.O. Box 25009, 23260-5009 ....... 804-775-6267

St. Louis, MO ....... 1106 Walnut St., 63199-2201 ....... 314-539-9300

St. Paul, MN ....... P.O. Box 64558, 55164-2201 ....... 612-293-3200

San Diego, CA ....... P.O. Box 2110, 92112-2110 ....... 619-233-0610

San Francisco, CA ....... P.O. Box 882000, 94188-2000 ....... 415-550-5700

San Juan, PR ....... P.O. Box 363667, 00936-3667 ....... 809-749-7600

Seattle, WA ....... P.O. Box 400, 98111-4000 ....... 206-442-6300

Tampa, FL ....... P.O. Box 22526, 33622-2526 ....... 813-281-5200

Washington, DC ....... P.O. Box 96096, 20066-6096 ....... 202-636-2300

----------------------------(TABLE END)--------------------------

Sources of Information

          Inquiries on the following information should be directed to the specified office, U.S. Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20260.

Consumer Information Contact the Consumer Advocate. Phone, 202-268-2284. Information on past and present schemes used to defraud the public is available through Congressional and Public Affairs, Postal Inspection Service. Phone, 202-268-4293.

Contracts and Small Business Activities Contact Purchasing. Phone, 202-268-4633.

Employment General information about jobs such as clerk, letter carrier, etc., including information about programs for veterans, may be obtained by contacting the nearest post office.

          Individuals interested in working at the Postal Headquarters in Washington, DC, may obtain information by calling 202-268-3218.

          Information about Inspection Service employment may be obtained from the Chief Postal Inspector. Phone, 202-268-4267.

Films Contact Corporate Relations for films available for loan to the public. Phone, 202-268-2189.

Philatelic Information Contact Stamp Services. Phone, 202-268-2312.

Philatelic Sales Contact Philatelic Fulfillment,  Kansas City, MO 64144-9998. Phone, 816-455-0970.

Publications Pamphlets on mailability, postage rates and fees, and many other topics may be obtained free of charge from the nearest post office.

          Most postal regulations are contained in Postal Service manuals covering domestic mail, international mail, postal operations, administrative support, employee and labor relations, financial management, and procurement. These manuals and other publications including the National Five-Digit ZIP Code and Post Office Directory (Publication 65) may be purchased from the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402-0001. (The National Five-Digit ZIP Code and Post Office Directory is also available through local post offices.)

Reading Rooms Located on 11th Floor North, Library. Phone, 202-268-2900.

For further information, contact the U.S. Postal Service, 475 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20260. Phone, 202-268-2000.

