Subject: D1) How are Atlantic hurricanes ranked?
Contributed by Chris Landsea

The USA utilizes the Saffir-Simpson hurricane intensity scale (Simpson 
and Riehl 1981) for the Atlantic and Northeast Pacific basins to give an 
estimate of the potential flooding and damage to property given a 
hurricane's estimated intensity:

Saffir-Simpson Scale
Saffir-Simpson
Category	Maximum sustained	Minimum 	Storm surge
		wind speed		central 
					pressure
	mph	m/s	kts		mb		ft	m
1	74-95	33-42	64-82		> 980		3-5	1.0-1.7
2	96-110	43-49	83-95		979-965		6-8	1.8-2.6
3	111-130	50-58	96-113		964-945		9-12	2.7-3.8
4	131-155	59-69	114-135		944-920		13-18	3.9-5.6
5	156+	70+	136+		< 920		19+	5.7+
 Note : Classification by central pressure was ended in the 1990s, and 
wind speed alone is now used. These estimates of the central pressure 
that accompany each category are for reference only.

Note : These surge values are for reference only. The actual storm surge 
experienced will depend on offshore bathymetery and onshore terrain and 
construction.

Damage
Category	Level		Description	
1 		MINIMAL		Damage primarily to shrubbery, trees, 
				foliage, and unanchored homes. No real 
				damage to other structures. Some damage to 
				poorly constructed signs. Low-lying coastal 
				roads inundated, minor pier damage, some small 
				craft in exposed anchorage torn from moorings.
Example		Hurricane Earl (1998)

2		MODERATE	Considerable damage to shrubbery and tree 
				foliage; some trees blown down. Major damage 
				to exposed mobile homes. Extensive damage to 
				poorly constructed signs. Some damage to 
				roofing materials of buildings; some window 
				and door damage. No major damage to buildings. 
				Coast roads and low-lying escape routes inland 
				cut by rising water 2 to 4 hours before 
				arrival of hurricane center. Considerable 
				damage to piers. Marinas flooded. Small craft 
				in unprotected anchorages torn from moorings. 
				Evacuation of some shoreline residences and 
				low-lying areas required.
Example	Hurricane Georges (1998)

3		EXTENSIVE	Foliage torn from trees; large trees blown 
				down. Practically all poorly constructed signs 
				blown down. Some damage to roofing materials 
				of buildings; some wind and door damage. Some 
				structural damage to small buildings. Mobile 
				homes destroyed. Serious flooding at coast and 
				many smaller structures near coast destroyed; 
				larger structures near coast damaged by 
				battering waves and floating debris. Low-lying 
				escape routes inland cut by rising water 3 to 
				5 hours before hurricane center arrives. Flat 
				terrain 5 feet of less above sea level flooded 
				inland 8 miles or more. Evacuation of low-lying
				residences within several blocks of shoreline 
				possibly required.
Example	Hurricane Fran (1996)


4		EXTREME		Shrubs and trees blown down; all signs down. 
				Extensive damage to roofing materials, windows 
				and doors. Complete failures of roofs on many 
				small residences. Complete destruction of 
				mobile homes. Flat terrain 10 feet of less 
				above sea level flooded inland as far as 6 
				miles. Major damage to lower floors of 
				structures near shore due to flooding and 
				battering by waves and floating debris. 
				Low-lying escape routes inland cut by rising 
				water 3 to 5 hours before hurricane center 
				arrives. Major erosion of beaches. Massive 
				evacuation of all residences within 500 yards 
				of shore possibly required, and of 
				single-story residences within 2 miles of 
				shore.
Example	Hurricane Betsy (1965)


5		CATASTROPHIC	Shrubs and trees blown down; considerable 
				damage to roofs of buildings; all signs down. 
				Very severe and extensive damage to windows 
				and doors. Complete failure of roofs on many 
				residences and industrial buildings. Extensive 
				shattering of glass in windows and doors. Some 
				complete building failures. Small buildings 
				overturned or blown away. Complete destruction 
				of mobile homes. Major damage to lower floors 
				of all structures less than 15 feet above sea 
				level within 500 yards of shore. Low-lying 
				escape routes inland cut by rising water 3 to 
				5 hours before hurricane center arrives. 
				Massive evacuation of residential areas on low 
				ground within 5 to 10 miles of shore possibly 
				required.
Example	Hurricane Camille (1969)


 Note that tropical storms are not on this scale, but can produce 
extensive damage with rainfall-produced flooding. Note also that category 
3, 4, and 5 hurricanes are collectively referred to as major (or intense) 
hurricanes. These major hurricanes cause over 83% of the damage in the 
USA even though they account for only 21% of tropical cyclone landfalls 
(Landsea 1993).

Subject: D2) How are Australian tropical cyclones ranked?
Cyclone Severity Categories - From the Australian Bureau of Meteorology
An estimate of cyclone severity is now included in all tropical cyclone 
advices. The table below provides information concerning effects due to 
wind which are typical of cyclones in the various categories. Remember 
that the system is not designed to give an exact statement of conditions 
at individual locations but will give a general idea of the expected 
worst conditions. Categories of cyclone severity range from " 1 " for 
weak cyclones to "5" for the most severe cyclones. Accordingly, the risk 
of property and crop damage, shore erosion and danger to life increases 
from low for a category 1 to very high for a category 5 cyclone. Using 
this severity scale, communities will be able to assess the degree of 
cyclone threat and take appropriate action. It must be emphasized that 
the category refers to the severity in the zone of maximum winds and 
therefore the effects felt at individual locations may not be exactly as 
described in the accompanying table.

Damage will vary from location to location depending upon factors such as:

	how far you are from the zone of maximum winds
	how exposed the location is
	building standards
	vegetation type
	resultant flooding
 It should also be noted that the category does not refer to storm tides; 
if a storm tide is expected it will be mentioned separately in the 
cyclone warning.

			Tropical Cyclone Severity
Categories	Winds					Typical effects
							(indicative only)
Category 1	Strongest gust less than 125 km/h	Negligible house damage.
							Damage to some crops, 
							trees and caravans. 
							Draft may drag moorings.

Category 2	Strongest gust 125 - 170 km/h		Minor house damage. 
							Significant damage to 
							signs, trees and 
							caravans. Heavy damage 
							to some crops. Risk of 
							power failure. Small 
							craft may break 
							moorings.

Category 3	Strongest gust 170 - 225 km/h		Some roof and 
(e.g.. Winifred)					structural damage. Some
							caravans destroyed. 
							Power failure likely.


Category 4	Strongest gust 225 - 280 km/h
(e.g.. Tracy)						Significant roofing 
							loss and structural 
							damage. Many caravans 
							destroyed and blown 
							away. Dangerous 
							airborne debris. 
							Widespread power 
							failure.

Category 5	Strongest gust More than 280 km/h	Extremely dangerous 
(e.g.. Orson)						with widespread 
							destruction.


Subject: D3) Why do tropical cyclones' winds rotate counter-clockwise 
(clockwise) in the Northern (Southern) Hemisphere? 
Contributed by Chris Landsea

The reason is that the earth's rotation sets up an apparent force (called 
the Coriolis force) that pulls the winds to the right in the Northern 
Hemisphere (and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere). So when a low 
pressure starts to form north of the equator, the surface winds will flow 
inward trying to fill in the low and will be deflected to the right and a 
counter-clockwise rotation will be initiated. The opposite (a deflection 
to the left and a clockwise rotation) will occur south of the equator.

NOTE: This force is too tiny to effect rotation in, for example, water 
that is going down the drains of sinks and toilets. The rotation in those 
will be determined by the geometry of the container and the original 
motion of the water. Thus one can find both clockwise and counter- 
clockwise flowing drains no matter what hemisphere you are located. If 
you don't believe this, test it out for yourself.

Subject: D4) What does "maximum sustained wind" mean ? How does it relate 
to gusts in tropical cyclones ?
Contributed by Chris Landsea

The TPC uses a 1 min averaging time for reporting the sustained (i.e. 
relatively long-lasting) winds. The maximum sustained wind mentioned in 
the advisories that NHC issues for tropical storms and hurricanes are the 
highest 1 min surface winds occurring within the circulation of the 
system. These "surface" winds are those observed (or, more often, 
estimated) to occur at the standard meteorological height of 10 m (33 ft) 
in an unobstructed exposure (i.e., not blocked by buildings or trees).

Since the inauguration of the Automatic Surface Observation System (ASOS) 
the National Weather Service has adopted a two minute average standard 
for its sustained wind definition. This is because the ASOS stations 
average and report their wind data over a two minute period. There is no 
conversion factor to change a two minute average wind into a one minute 
average wind, and it is pointless to try to estimate the highest one 
minute wind over a two minute period, as they are essentially the same.

Gusts are a few seconds (3-5 s) wind peak. Typically in a hurricane 
environment, the value of the maximum 3 second gust over a 1 minute 
period is on the order of 1.3 times (or 30% higher than) than the 1 min 
sustained wind.

One complication with the use of the 1 min averaging time for the 
standard for sustained wind in the Atlantic and Northeast Pacific 
tropical cyclone basins (where the United States has the official World 
Meteorological Organization tropical cyclone advisory responsibilities) 
is that in most of the rest of the world, a 10 min averaging time is 
utilized for "sustained wind". While one can utilize a simple ratio to 
convert from peak 10 min wind to peak 1 min wind (roughly 12% higher for 
the latter), such systematic differences to make interbasin comparison of 
tropical cyclones around the world problematic.
 
Powell, M.D., S.H. Houston, and T.A. Reinhold, 1996:"Hurricane Andrew's 
Landfall in South Florida, Part I: Standardizing measurements for 
documentation of surface wind fields." Wea. Forecast. v.11, p.329-349


Last updated April 21, 2006

Subject: D5) How does the damage that hurricanes cause increase as a 
function of wind speed?
Contributed by Chris Landsea

Or to rephrase the question: Would a minimal 74 mph hurricane cause one 
half of the damage that a major hurricane with 148 mph winds? No, the 
amount of damage (at least experienced along the U.S. mainland) does not 
increase linearly with the wind speed. Instead, the damage produced 
increases exponentially with the winds. The 148 mph hurricane (a category 
4 on the Saffir-Simpson Scale) may produce - on average - up to 250 times 
the damage of a minimal category 1 hurricane!

Pielke and Landsea (1998) analyzed the damage caused by various 
categories of U.S. landfalling tropical storms and hurricanes after 
normalizing by the inflation rate, increases in wealth and coastal 
population changes. Tropical cyclones from 1925 through 1995 were 
tabulated in terms of 1995 U.S. dollars.

The following table summarizes the findings:

Intensity			Cases	Median Damage	Potential Damage *
Tropical/Subtropical Storm	118	less than $1,000,000	0
Hurricane Category 1		45	$33,000,000	1
Hurricane Category 2		29	$336,000,000	10
Hurricane Category 3		40	$1,412,000,000	50
Hurricane Category 4		10	$8,224,000,000	250
Hurricane Category 5		2	$5,973,000,000	500
* The "Potential Damage" values just provide a reference value if one 
assigns the median damage caused by a category 1 hurricane to be "1". The 
rapid increase in damage as the categories go up is apparent. (The value 
for Category 5 hurricanes in brackets may not be representative of true 
amounts because of the very small sample [two] available.)

Other interesting findings:
Mean annual damage in mainland US is $4,900,000,000.
The worst U.S. hurricane damage - after normalizing to today's 
population, wealth and dollars - is no longer Hurricane Andrew, but is 
instead the 1926 Great Miami Hurricane. If this storm hit in the 
mid-1990s, it is estimated that it would cause over $70 BILLION in South 
Florida and then an additional $10 BILLION in the Florida panhandle and 
Alabama.
The United States has at least a 1 in 6 chance of experiencing losses 
related to hurricanes of at least $10 BILLION on average.
Even though the major hurricanes (the category 3, 4 and 5 storms) 
comprise only 21% of all US landfalling tropical cyclones, they account 
for 83% of all of the damage.
Damages have NOT been on the increase once one normalizes for inflation, 
wealth, and coastal population changes. Instead one sees that hurricane 
damages that were fairly low during the first two decades of the 20th 
Century, quite high in the 1920s and 1940s to 1960s, and substantially 
lower in the 1970s and 1980s. Only during the early 1990s does damage 
approach the high level of impacts seen back in the 1940s through the 
1960s. Thus recent hurricane damages are NOT unprecedented.


Subject: D6) Why are the strongest winds in a hurricane typically on the 
right side of the storm? 
Contributed by Chris Landsea

First, the "right side of the storm" is defined with respect to the 
storm's motion: if the hurricane is moving to the west, the right side 
would be to the north of the storm; if the hurricane is moving to the 
north, the right side would be to the east of the storm, etc.

In general, the strongest winds in a hurricane are found on the right 
side of the storm because the motion of the hurricane also contributes to 
its swirling winds. A hurricane with a 90 mph [145 km/hr] winds while 
stationary would have winds up to 100 mph [160 km/hr] on the right side 
and only 80 mph [130 km/hr] on the left side if it began moving (any 
direction) at 10 mph [16 km/hr].

Note that the U.S. OAR and other forecasting center advisories already 
take this asymmetry into account and, in this case, would state that the 
highest winds were 100 mph [160 km/hr].


For tropical cyclones in the Southern Hemisphere, these differences are 
reversed: the strongest winds are on the left side of the storm. This is 
because the winds swirl clockwise south of the equator in tropical 
cyclones.

Subject: D7) How much energy does a hurricane release?
Contributed by Chris Landsea

Hurricanes can be thought of, to a first approximation, as a heat engine; 
obtaining its heat input from the warm, humid air over the tropical 
ocean, and releasing this heat through the condensation of water vapor 
into water droplets in deep thunderstorms of the eyewall and rainbands, 
then giving off a cold exhaust in the upper levels of the troposphere 
(~12 km/8 mi. up).

One can look at the energetics of a hurricane in two ways:

the total amount of energy released by the condensation of water droplets 
or ...
the amount of kinetic energy generated to maintain the strong swirling 
winds of the hurricane (Emanuel 1999).
It turns out that the vast majority of the heat released in the 
condensation process is used to cause rising motions in the thunderstorms 
and only a small portion drives the storm's horizontal winds.

Method 1) - Total energy released through cloud/rain formation:
An average hurricane produces 1.5 cm/day (0.6 inches/day) of rain inside 
a circle of radius 665 km (360 n.mi.) (Gray 1981). (More rain falls in 
the inner portion of hurricane around the eyewall, less in the outer 
rainbands.) Converting this to a volume of rain gives 2.1 x 1016 cm3/day. 
A cubic cm of rain weighs 1 gm. Using the latent heat of condensation, 
this amount of rain produced gives

5.2 x 1019 Joules/day or 
6.0 x 1014 Watts.
This is equivalent to 200 times the world-wide electrical generating 
capacity - an incredible amount of energy produced!

Method 2) - Total kinetic energy (wind energy) generated:
For a mature hurricane, the amount of kinetic energy generated is equal 
to that being dissipated due to friction. The dissipation rate per unit 
area is air density times the drag coefficient times the windspeed cubed 
(See Emanuel 1999 for details). One could either integrate a typical wind 
profile over a range of radii from the hurricane's center to the outer 
radius encompassing the storm, or assume an average windspeed for the 
inner core of the hurricane. Doing the latter and using 40 m/s (90 mph) 
winds on a scale of radius 60 km (40 n.mi..), one gets a wind dissipation 
rate (wind generation rate) of 

1.3 x 1017 Joules/day or 
1.5 x 1012 Watts.
This is equivalent to about half the world-wide electrical generating 
capacity - also an amazing amount of energy being produced!
Either method is an enormous amount energy being generated by hurricanes. 
However, one can see that the amount of energy released in a hurricane 
(by creating clouds/rain) that actually goes to maintaining the 
hurricane's spiraling winds is a huge ratio of 400 to 1.

Subject: D8) What are "concentric eyewall cycles" (or "eyewall 
replacement cycles") and why do they cause a hurricane's maximum winds to 
weaken?
Contributed by Stan Goldenberg
		
		
"Concentric eyewall cycles" (or "eyewall replacement cycle" ) naturally 
occur in intense tropical cyclones , i.e. major hurricanes (winds > 50 
m/s, 100 kt, 115 mph) or Categories 3, 4, and 5 on the Saffir-Simpson 
scale. As tropical cyclones reach this threshold of intensity, they 
usually - but not always - have an eyewall and radius of maximum winds 
that contract to a very small size, around 10 to 25 km [5 to 15 mi.]. At 
this point, some of the outer rainbands may organize into an outer ring 
of thunderstorms that slowly moves inward and robs the inner eyewall of 
its needed moisture and momentum. During this phase, the tropical cyclone 
is weakening (i.e. the maximum winds die off a bit and the central 
pressure goes up). Eventually the outer eyewall replaces the inner one 
completely and the storm can be the same intensity as it was previously 
or, in some cases, even stronger. A concentric eyewall cycle occurred in 
Hurricane Andrew (1992) before landfall near Miami: a strong intensity 
was reached, an outer eyewall formed, this contracted in concert with a 
pronounced weakening of the storm, and as the outer eyewall completely 
replaced the original one the hurricane re-intensified. Another example 
is Hurricane Allen (1980) which went through repeated eyewall replacement 
cycles -- going from Category 5 to Category 3 status several times. To 
learn more about concentric eyewall cycles, read Willoughby et al. (1982) 
and Willoughby (1990a).

It was the discovery of concentric eyewall cycles that was partially 
responsible for the end of the U.S. Government's hurricane modification 
experiment Project STORMFURY, since what the scientists had hoped to 
produce through seeding was happening frequently as a natural part of 
hurricane dynamics.

Subject: D9) What causes each hurricane to have a different maximum wind 
speed for a given minimum sea-level pressure ?
Contributed by Chris Landsea

The basic horizontal balance in a tropical cyclone above the boundary 
layer is between the sum of the Coriolis 'acceleration' and the 
centripetal 'acceleration', balanced by the horizontal pressure gradient 
force. This balance is referred to as gradient balance, where the 
Coriolis 'acceleration' is defined as the horizontal velocity of an air 
parcel, v, times the Coriolis parameter , f. Centripetal 'force' is 
defined as the acceleration on a parcel of air moving in a curved path, 
directed toward the center of curvature of the path, with magnitude v2/r, 
where v is the horizontal velocity of the parcel and r the radius of 
curvature of the path. The centripetal force alters the original 
two-force geostrophic balance and creates a non-geostrophic gradient 
wind. The reason that different peak winds can result in different 
central pressures is caused by the fact that the radius, r, of the peak 
wind varies. A storm with 40 m/s peak winds with a 100 km RMW will have a 
much lower pressure drop than one with a 25 km RMW.

Subject: D10) Why do hurricane force winds start at 64 knots ?
Contributed by Neal Dorst

In 1805-06, Commander Francis Beaufort RN (later Admiral Sir Francis 
Beaufort) devised a descriptive wind scale in an effort to standardize 
wind reports in ship's logs. His scale divided wind speeds into 14 Forces 
(soon after pared down to thirteen) with each Force assigned a number, a 
common name, and a description of the effects such a wind would have on a 
sailing ship. And since the worst storm an Atlantic sailor was likely to 
run into was a hurricane, that name was applied to the top Force on the 
scale.

During the 19th Century, with the manufacture of accurate anemometers, 
actual numerical values were assigned to each Force level, but it wasn't 
until 1926 (with revisions in 1939 and 1946) that the International 
Meteorological Committee (predecessor of the WMO) adopted a universal 
scale of wind speed values. Since the scale was originally nautical in 
nature, and that most wind reports at that time were in nautical miles 
per hour (or converted to them), these numerical values were given in 
knots. It was a progressive scale with the range of speed for Forces 
increasing as you go higher. Thus Force 1 is only 3 knots in range (1 kt 
- 3 kt), while the Force 11 is eight knots (56 kt - 63 kt) in range. So 
Force 12 [Hurricane] starts out at 64 knots (74 mph, 33 m/s).

There is nothing magical in this number, and since hurricane force winds 
are a rare experience, chances are the committee which decided on this 
number didn't do so because of any real observations during a hurricane. 
Indeed, the Smeaton-Rouse wind scale in 1759 pegged hurricane force at 70 
knots (80 mph, 36 m/s). Just the same, when a tropical cyclone has 
maximum winds of approximately these speeds we do see the mature 
structure (eye, eyewall, spiral rainbands) begin to form, so there is 
some utility with setting hurricane force in this neighborhood.

References


Hamblyn, Richard "The Invention of Clouds : How an Amateur Meteorologist 
Forged the Language of the Skies", (2001) Farrar, Straus, and Giroux New 
York, NY

DeBlieu, Jan "Wind : How the Flow of Air Has Shaped Life, Myth, and the 
Land" (1998) Houghton Mifflin Co. New York, NY

Last updated August 13, 2004


