MONTEREY BAY NATIONAL MARINE SANCTUARYADVISORY COUNCILDRAFT Meeting MinutesApril 3, 1998Moss Landing Chamber of CommerceThe Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary (MBNMS) Advisory Council met on Friday, April 3, 1998 at the Moss Landing Chamber of Commerce building in Moss Landing.  Public categories and government agencies were present as indicated:Agriculture: Richard NutterDiving: Ken LundieAMBAG: Katherine BeiersEducation: Pat Clark-GrayAt Large: Karin Strasser Kauffman, ChairEnforcement: Doug HuckinsAt Large: Steve WebsterFishing: Dave DanbomAt Large: Chet ForrestPorts & Harbors: Steve ScheiblauerBusiness & Industry: Steve AbbottRecreation:  Sally SmithCA EPA: Marc Del Piero - NOT PRESENTResearch:  Greg CaillietCA Coastal Commission: Charles LesterTourism:  Ed BrownCA Resources Agency: Melissa Miller-HensonU.S. Coast Guard: LCDR Phyllis BlantonConservation: Rachel SaundersThe following non-voting members were present as indicated:Monterey Bay NMS:  William DourosGulf of the Farallones NMS and Cordell Bank NMS:  Ed Ueber - NOT PRESENTChannel Islands NMS:  Ed Cassano - NOT PRESENTElkhorn Slough NERR:  Becky Christensen - NOT PRESENTI.	CALL TO ORDER, ROLL CALL, SWEARING-IN OF NEW MEMBERS,	APPROVAL OF MARCH 13, 1998 DRAFT MEETING MINUTES,	REVIEW OF CORRESPONDENCE, REMARKS OF OUTGOING CHAIR,	ELECTION OF SAC CHAIR AND SECRETARYA)	Call to OrderThe meeting was called to order by the Chair at 9:05 a.m.B)	Welcome and Roll CallThe Chair welcomed new Advisory Council members and the public to Moss Landing.  Lisa de Marignac conducted the roll call.C)	Swearing-in of New MembersSanctuary Superintendent, Bill Douros, conducted the swearing-in of the following new members:Steve Scheiblauer - Ports and HarborsTed Balestreri - Business and Industry AlternateEd Cooper - Diving AlternateMichael Jani - Agriculture AlternateEllen-Faurot Daniels - At-Large AlternateThe following newly appointed member has not been sworn-in:  Rick Starr, Research Alternate.The Chair encouraged alternate members to attend meetings and to stay in touch with their primary members.D)	Approval of Previous Meeting MinutesThe minutes from the March 13, 1998 meeting were approved as amended.E)	Review of CorrespondenceThe Chair reviewed Council correspondence written since the last Council meeting, emphasizing the memo from Bill Douros announcing that the Jade Rule will be finalized on June 15, 1998. Ed Brown made a motion that the Council send a letter to the California State Lands Commission requesting that they adopt similar language regarding the collection of jade at Jade Cove.  The motion was seconded by Chet Forrest and passed unanimously.E)	Remarks of Outgoing ChairKarin Strasser Kauffman announced that after serving two consecutive terms as Chair, she must step down.  She thanked the Council for the previous evening¹s dinner, nautical chart, and good-byes.  She explained that in becoming an Advisory Council member, she was able to enjoy focusing on one issue - the central California coast.  Karin thanked Terry Jackson for selecting her as a member of the founding Council and highlighted the achievements of the Council over the past few years, such as the Jade Rule and the deterring of user fees.  Karin emphasized there never was a time when she didn¹t feel the support of the Council.  In conclusion, she assured members that the Council is ready and in a good position to proceed forward, with new members, and a new Superintendent.  She offered to work closely with next Chair.F)	Election of SAC Chair and SecretaryKarin opened the floor for nominations for the Chair.Greg Cailliet nominated Steve Webster.  Steve Webster accepted.Dave Danbom nominated Steve Abbott.  Steve Abbott accepted.Steve Webster was elected as Chair by ballot.The floor was opened for nominations for the Secretary.Greg Cailliet nominated Ed Brown.  Ed accepted.Ed Brown was elected as Secretary.Steve Webster chaired the remainder of the meeting.  Steve thanked the Council and stated that he is counting on Karin¹s counsel and advice.II.	PUBLIC COMMENTS ON ITEMS NOT ON THE AGENDAJim Stilwell - Moss Landing Harbor - reported that dredging of the harbor has resumed and that the Western Flyer has been extricated.  However, the Pt. Lobos is still grounding and there are fishermen who are unable to get out of the harbor.  He is unhappy that the Sanctuary is opposing the issuance of permits to dispose dredge material.  He also expressed concern regarding a newspaper article on possible no-take zones at the Channel Islands.Tom Tengdin - Moss Landing Harbor - also expressed concern about the dredging of Moss Landing Harbor.Dave Zaches - Save Our Shores - expressed his appreciation of the Council and thanked Karin for her efforts as Chair.Comments were offered by several Council members and staff in clarification and response to Mr. Stilwell¹s observations.III.	SANCTUARY OFFICE REPORTBill Douros provided a verbal and written report on MBNMS activities.  See Attachment A.IV.	PRESENTATION:  DUKE ENERGY
Steve Abbott introduced Tom Williams from Duke Energy.  Tom presented an overview of Duke Energy, which was formed when Duke Power purchased Pan Energy.  Duke Energy purchased the PG&E power plant after the 1996 de-regulation laws required PG&E to sell 50% of its fossil fuel plants.  In November 1997, Duke Energy won the bid for three PG&E plants in California - Moss Landing, Morro Bay, and Oakland.  See Attachment B.  Tom emphasized that the ownership of power lines will not change - PG&E retains the ownership of the power lines and the transmission switch yards. Tom announced that Duke¹s overall utility rates will be 40% lower than PG&E¹s.  Additionally, according to Tom, Duke Energy has been extremely active with conservation efforts and would like to immediately establish a good rapport with the local community.  See Attachment B.  Discussion ensued regarding potential partnerships between Duke Energy and the community.V.	PRESENTATIONS:  SELF-INTRODUCTIONS BY	NEW PRIMARY SAC MEMBERSThe Chair asked that the new primary Council members provide the Council with their backgrounds.Chet Forrest - At-Large - has been a resident of Cambria for seven years.  He is retired from his career as an electrical engineer and has a strong desire to work with communities and children in an effort to educate them about the marine environment.  His constituents have above average incomes, are retired, are suspicious of government, are unaware of the Sanctuary program and its goals, and are un-admitted conservationists.  The concerns of his constituents are future oil exploration and development south of the Sanctuary boundary, the live rockfish fishery, visitor intrusion at the elephant seal haul-out sites, and development and water shortages.Chet listed his goals for the upcoming year:… to make the Sanctuary aware of the concerns of his constituents… expand the awareness of the Sanctuary in the southern end… increase member involvement and buy-in from businesses and organizationsFinally, Chet announced that he is honored to serve on the Council.Ken Lundie - Diving - expressed that he has felt overwhelmed since joining the Council.  Ken lives in Moss Beach.  He has served on Peace Corps and joined the San Francisco Fire Department 24 years ago.  He is a member of the Dive and Rescue Team and the Coastside Preservation and Recreation Land Trust.  He explained that though he is not well known by the dive community, he is looking forward to working with divers and plans to be active on their behalf.  He is honored to serve on the Council and to have Ed Cooper as a partner. Sally Smith - Recreation - has been ³recreating² in Sanctuary waters all her life.  She is an active member of the Surfrider Foundation and Surfer¹s Alliance, both of which are involved in water quality monitoring.  Other issues she¹s worked on include shark chumming and abandoned oil platforms.  Her primary concerns are the nearshore waters and she plans to use the Council to address these concerns and to promote the Sanctuary¹s Water Quality Protection Program.Steve Scheiblauer - Ports and Harbors - grew up on the west coast.  He worked as a lifeguard before becoming involved with harbors.  Issues of concern to his constituents are dredging and disposal issues.  He is an advocate of boater education.  He worked hard for Sanctuary status, along with local fishermen, to ensure that the Sanctuary would not work against their interests.  Steve believes dialog is incredibly important.VI.	ANNUAL IN-DEPTH STAFF AND	WORKING GROUP REPORTS:	SANCTUARY EDUCATION PROGRAM AND THE SEPDorris Welch presented a report on the Sanctuary Education Panel (SEP).  The SEP formed six years ago.  Dorris chaired the panel for five years, though Jeff Bryant was recently elected as the panel¹s new Chair.  The SEP convenes regular meetings, encourages collaborations, enhances communications, presents program information, forms subcommittees for specific tasks, visits interpretive sites, and disseminates Sanctuary information.Roles of the SEP include:… Recommend educational priorities… Advise on regional educational needs… Review and advise on educational materials… Dissemination of educational materials… Promote communications and collaborations between institutions, schools, etc.… Support Sanctuary Symposium planning… Assist with education strategic planningCollaborative Efforts of the SEP in 1997 include:… Teacher workshops… Sanctuary Symposium… Sanctuary K-8 outreach… Monterey Bay Aquarium/Sanctuary Natural History book… Long Marine Lab Sanctuary Explorations… Sanctuary community events… Oceans Sciences Bowl… Santa Cruz Task Force interpretative planningDorris emphasized that incorporating the Sanctuary message into existing programs is a highly effective tool.The SEP¹s 1998 Focus areas include:… Expand sanctuary research interpretation… Web site educational development… Sanctuary education for ecotourism professionals… Improving SAC/working group relationships… Improving subcommittee rolesDorris presented an overview of Long Marine Lab¹s Sanctuary-related activities and Pat Clark-Gray summarized State Parks role in Sanctuary related activities, along with the roles of other SEP member¹s organizations.Liz Love, MBNMS Education Coordinator, and Kip Evans, MBNMS Education Specialist, gave oral and written presentations on the MBNMS Education Program.  See Attachment C.The mission of the Education Program is to promote awareness, understanding, appreciation and stewardship of the MBNMS through public education and conservation programs.  The goals of the program include:… Communicate and collaborate with organizations and agencies who share similar educational goals in order to strengthen the effectiveness of MBNMS education efforts;… Provide public outreach by developing exhibits, publications, programs, and events to educate the public about the Sanctuary;… Provide Sanctuary education for students and teachers through outreach programs, events, workshops, curriculum, resources, and services.Liz and Kip reviewed education activities of 1997 and asked the Council to participate in future education efforts by distributing educational materials, giving slide presentations, and utilizing Sanctuary exhibits.VII.	PRESENTATION:  MONTEREY BAY EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND	TECHNOLOGY CENTER OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA,	SANTA CRUZ (MBEST)Lora Lee Martin, MBEST Director, gave a presentation on MBEST. The center is located on 1,100 acres of property in Fort Ord and is intended to help the region create an industry of research and education in marine sciences technology.  Six hundred acres will be used for habitat maintenance and five hundred acres will be developed for an industry center.  The vision of MBEST is to create an interactive place to link research activities to the international market place.  MBEST would like to create a STEP Institute - Science and Technology Education and Policy to serve as an international gateway.  The function of MBEST will be to serve as a facilitator of research institutions in the area through student training and placement.UC MBEST has received federal funding for the following:… $30,000 - utility plan… $500,000 - wastewater pumping… $500,000 - water and sewer mains… $100,000 - first new building… $200,000 - planning… $200,000 - remediationConstruction will start on the first new building by the end of the year.  MBEST has the option to sell or lease the land, but hopes to mainly lease land.Four research opportunities are now available:… groundwater characterization at Ft. Ord… ecological studies on the Superfund site… on-line real-time chemical analysis of the Superfund site… policy studies on what can be done with the Superfund site and remediated waterMBEST is looking for input from community on how to most effectively utilize the center and would also like assistance with planning.  The center is expecting 4 million square feet of development over next fifty years.Potential uses of MBEST land include:… Organic farming… Asphalt recycling operations… De-construction project to salvage and recycle Fort Ord barracks materialsMBEST is also hoping to focus on ³sustainable² development projects such as recycling and solar energy.MBEST plans to initiate marketing and developing brochures within the next twelve months.VIII.	REPORT:  THE JASON PROJECTBill Douros reported that The Jason Project was shown on the local cable channel per the request of the Council.  The project is a yearly endeavor headed by Bob Ballard and supported by EDS.  This year¹s project highlighted Monterey and Bermuda.  The Aquarium and NOAA supported this year¹s project.Most of the broadcasts highlighted the Sanctuary and its message.  JASON may come back to the area, and will give at least a two-year notice so that locals may decide whether or not to designate local schools as pin sites to receive the broadcasts.IX.	DISCUSSION:   SAC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR	MBNMS RESEARCH PROGRAMThe Council offered the following suggestions for the MBNMS Research Program:… Assessing the health of the Sanctuary and identifying hot spots… Habitat assessment and the changes over time… Implications of water temperature change… Squid research and sea otter/prey research (public suggestion)Discussion ensued regarding the contracted Research Coordinator position, and the need for long-term funding for research.X.	PRESENTATION:  INTERAGENCY COORDINATION AND PARTNERSHIPSAaron King, MBNMS, gave an oral and written presentation on the Sanctuary¹s interagency coordination and partnerships.  See Attachment D.The Sanctuary is involved in a total of fifty cooperative projects and works with a total of seventy agencies and organizations.XI.	DISCUSSION:  NATIONAL OCEANS CONFERENCEBill Douros reported that the National Oceans Conference is scheduled for June 11-12.  Vice President Al Gore¹s attendance is confirmed and President Clinton¹s attendance is also possible.  The Navy and NOAA are co-hosting the event and MBNMS is NOAA¹s primary on-site liaison.  Possible items on the agenda include defense, fisheries, coastal development, and harbors and commerce.  The conference will be held at the Naval Post Graduate School and participation will be limited, but the conference has the potential to be an outstanding opportunity locally.  The formation of a local coordinating committee on opportunities of the conference has been spearheaded by Sam Farr.MBNMS will keep the Council informed on potential roles and activities in which Council members may participate.XII.	DISCUSSION:  SAC SUPPORT OF MBNMS BUDGET AUGMENTATIONBill Douros reviewed the Federal budget process and the function the Council may take to request support for the NMSP budget.The Council agreed that the Year of the Ocean and the National Oceans Conference are good opportunities for working to increase the Federal budget for the sanctuaries.XIII.	REPORT:  VESSEL TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT WORKSHOPSEllen Faurot-Daniels reported that the workgroup held their ninth meeting over a two-day period where members began to discuss distance-from-shore options.  At the workgroup¹s last meeting, they discussed the potential of drafting a resolution to the International Maritime Organization (IMO).  Four public workshops will be scheduled to review the workgroup¹s draft package.  Ellen suggested that the Council become involved in planning the format of the workshops.  Holly Price, MBNMS suggested that the Council can help nudge along the process to implementation.XIV.	ANNOUNCEMENTS FROM COUNCIL MEMBERS… Sally Smith - Paradise Surf Shop is hosting an April 15 slide show presentation on Great White Sharks.… Travis Evans- requested that the Council place no-take zones on a future agenda.… Melissa Miller-Henson - announced that California Resources Agency grants are now available.The meeting adjourned at 5:00 p.m.Respectfully submitted,Lisa de MarignacMBNMS Advisory Council CoordinatorENCMBNMS Office ReportDuke Energy reportsEducation Program ReportMBNMS Coordination and Partnerships Report