
   COMMONWEALTH ELECTRIC COMPANY, PETITIONER V. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
UTILITIES OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS

   No. 86-61

   In the Supreme Court of the United States

   October Term, 1986

   On Petition For A Writ Of Certiorari To The Supreme Judicial Court
Of Massachusetts

   Brief For The United States And The Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission As Amici Curiae

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Question Presented
   Statement
   Discussion
   Conclusion

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether, under the circumstances of this case, the Federal Power
Act, 16 U.S.C. 824 et seq., barred the Massachusetts Department of
Public Utilities from (a) attributing to a retail seller of electric
power a portion of the "imprudence" of its wholesaler in managing a
nuclear power plant and therefore (b) denying the retailer's request
to recover in its retail rates certain power purchase costs due to an
outage at the nuclear plant.

   This brief is filed in response to the Court's invitation to the
Solicitor General to file a brief expressing the views of the United
States.

                               STATEMENT

   1. The Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. 824 et seq., gives the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission exclusive regulatory authority over "the
regulation of interstate wholesale utility rates" (Nantahala Power &
Light Co. v. Thornburg, No. 85-568 (June 17, 1986), slip op. 12).
Rates for the sale of power at retail are regulated by the states, but
"a state utility commission setting retail prices must allow, as
reasonable operating expenses, costs incurred as a result of paying a
FERC-determined wholesale price" (id. at 11).  That is, under the
"filed rate doctrine" and the "Narragansett doctrine," in order to
avoid a prohibited "'trapping' of costs" (id. at 17), the FERC-filed
wholesale rate paid by a utility must be treated as "reasonable" by
the state regulatory commission in setting retail rates.  /1/ However,
this Court has not resolve the extent to which a state commission may
determine for itself, in a retail proceeding, "the reasonableness of
purchasing power from a particular source of, rather than paying a
particular rate for, FERC-approved power" (id. at 18-19).

   Boston Edison Company is the operator of the Pilgrim I nuclear
plant;  it also sells electric power at both wholesale and retail to
Massachusetts customers.  Commonwealth Electric Company, the
petitioner here, is a public utility that purchases electric power at
wholesale and sells electric power at retail to Massachusetts
customers.  In August 1972, Boston Edison and petitioner agreed that
for 28 years petitioner would purchase 11% of the power from Boston
Edison's Pilgrim I nuclear plant (see Pet. App. 76a-117a).  As the
Federal Power Act requires (see note 1, supra), petitioner and Boston
Edison filed the contract with the Commission, which allowed it to
become effective.  /2/

   From December 7, 1981 to April 8, 1982, the Pilgrim I plant was
shut down.  During that outage both Boston Edison and petitioner
purchases replacement power (under other FERC-filed contracts) that
was more expensive than the power they had been receiving from Pilgrim
I.  When Boston Edison applied to the Massachusetts Department of
Public Utilities (DPU), the state regulatory agency, for a retail rate
increase to recover the additional cost of that replacement power, the
DPU ruled that the Pilgrim I outage was caused by Boston Edison's
imprudent plant management (see Pet. App. 39a).  When petitioner later
applied to the DPU for a similar increase, the DPU denied petitioner's
application (id. at 28a-30a, 39a-44a), noting that it had previously
denied Boston Edison's application (id. at 29a, 39a).  In petitioner's
proceeding, the DPU determined that, under the contract between the
two utilities, petitioner "shares responsibility for (Boston Edison's)
imprudence during the Pilgrim I outage" (id. at 41a).  The DPU focused
on a contractual provision specifying that Boston Edison did "'not
guarantee a constant supply of * * * electricity'" and that petitioner
"'assume(d) the risks on non-delivery of electricity * * * to the same
extent as if it were itself operating (Pilgrim I) for the purpose of
supplying itself with electricity'" (ibid. (quoting Section A-3.1 of
the contract)).

   The DPU rejected the claim that a different provision in the
contract (Section 2.3) set forth petitioner's obligations to its
retail customers in the event of an outage.  Section 2.3 of the
contract states that if, as a result of an outage, "no deliveries are
made * * * for one or more periods of at least one hundred twenty
(120) consecutive days each, the term of this Agreement * * * will be
extended for a period equal to the aggregate of such periods" (Pet.
App. 82a).  In the DPU's view, while "(s)uch a clause could possibly
mitigate damages" in other circumstances, "this particular contract
extension, almost twenty years in the future," was insufficient to
mitigate damages in the case since "(t)he present value of the benefit
is tremendously speculative" (id. at 42a).  Rather than rely on such
uncertain future events, the DPU gave petitioner's retail ratepayers
immediate rate relief;  the agency reduced petitioner's proposed rate
increase by the incremental amount the utility paid for replacement
power during the outage, $552,513 (id. at 44a).

   3. On appeal, the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts affirmed
the DPU order (Pet. App. 1a-26a).  The court relied on the contractual
provisions (id. at 6a-7a & n.1) and the state law "scheme of public
utility regulation" (id. at 8a) to hold that "(t)he DPU was warranted
in finding that the provisions of the contract reveal the company's
intent to be treated as a joint owner and impose the kinds of risks
and obligations ordinarily associated with ownership" (id. at 8a-9a).

   The court next rejected petitioner's claim that federal law
preempted the challenged state regulatory action.  The court reached
that conclusion by applying the standards for assessing claims of
preemption established by this Court.  First, the court stated that in
enacting the Federal Power Act Congress did not "occupy the field of
regulation of electricity sales * * * (but) left regulation of sales
at retail to the States" (Pet. App. 17a).  Next, the court found that
petitioner had failed to show that the DPU decision was in "'actual
conflict'" with any federal regulation or that there was a "physical
impossibility of compliance with both State and Federal direction"
(ibid. (quoting Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul, 373 U.S.
132, 142-143 (1963)).  Finally, the court considered whether the DPU
decision posed an obstacle to realizing the purposes and objectives of
the Federal Power Act.  Finding no such obstacle, the court held that
since this case involves retail ratemaking the state's "inquiry into
the prudence of a retail seller in choosing the source of its supply
and in incurring particular costs" did not disturb the federal
regulation of rates for wholesale transactions (Pet. App. 19a).

   The court ruled also that the DPU'S decision did not constitute a
collateral attack on FERC'S approval of the Boston Edison-Commonwealth
contract:  "(b)ecause FERC does not have jurisdiction over retail
rates, the issue raised here could not, and should not, have been
raised (in the federal administrative process)" (Pet. App. 20a-21a).
/3/

                              DISCUSSION

   Although the opinions of the Massachusetts DPU and the Supreme
Judicial Court do not make the basis for the state determination
entirely clear, we think they are best read to base the denial of the
rate increase requested by petitioner on narrow grounds that do not
present any question of general importance under this Court's decision
in Nantahala or under the filed rate and Narragansett doctrines.
Accordingly, we believe that the case does not warrant this Court's
review.

   1. In Nantahala, this Court reserved the question whether "a
particular quantity of power procured by a utility from a particular
source could be deemed unreasonably excessive if lower-cost power is
available elsewhere, even though the higher-cost power actually
purchased is obtained at a FERC-approved, and therefore reasonable,
price" (slip op. 19 (emphasis in original)).  Both the state court
(Pet. App. 19a-20a) and the parties (Pet. 15-16;  Br. in Opp. 11-18)
suggest that this case presents a version of that question.  We
disagree:  the DPU did indeed bar petitioner from recovering its costs
of purchased power on the ground that the purchases were necessitated
by imprudence;  but the imprudence here -- plant mismanagement
partially attributed to petitioner by virtue of its contract with the
plant operators -- is of a different sort from that hypothesided in
Nantahala and does not, under the circumstances, present questions of
general significance.

   The denial of the rate increase sought by petitioner was based on
two determinations by the Massachusetts DPU, each of which it was
entitled to make only because of the somewhat unusual circumstances of
this case.  First, the DPU determined that Boston Edison the operator
of Pilgrim I, had mismanaged the facility and was responsible for the
outage;  the DPU had occasion, and jurisdiction, to make such a
determination with respect to petitioner's vendor because of the
coincidence that Boston Edison also sells power at retail and had
applied for, and been denied, a rate increase.  Second, the DPU
determined that the particular terms of the FERC-filed contract
between Boston Edison and petitioner made petitioner responsible for a
share of the consequences of the mismanagement of Pilgrim I;  the DPU
had jurisdiction to make this determination only because FERC had not
had occasion to interpret the contract in this respect.  /4/

   Neither determination presents an issue of general importance under
Nantahala.  First, plant mismanagement is quite different from the
imprudence under discussion in Nantahala.  The allegation that a
utility selling at retail should have chosen to acquire power from
Source A, rather than from Source B under a FERC-filed rate schedule,
may raise a significant question as to whether the state regulator has
power to resolve that issue (see Nantahala, slip op. 19, citing Pike
County Light & Power Co. v. Pennsylvania Public Utility Comm'n, 77 Pa.
Commw. 268, 273-274, 465 A.2d 735, 737-738 (1983)).  But the
allegation that a utility selling at retail is not entitled to recover
the cost of purchased power because it has mismanaged its production
facility raises no such question:  it is clear that the state
regulator may deny a rate increase on that ground, as the
Massachusetts DPU did with respect to Boston Edison.  See Violet v.
FERC, 800 F.2d 280, 282 (1st Cir. 1986) (citing Missouri ex rel.
Southwestern Bell Telephone Co. v. Public Service Comm'n, 262 U.S.
276, 289 (1923) (Brandeis, J., concurring)).  /5/

   The DPU's second determination -- that petitioner could be held
partially responsible for the imprudent management of Pilgrim I
presents a more difficult question.  But although there is language in
both the DPU and state court opinions that we find troubling, /6/ we
agree with the court opinions that;  at bottom, the DPU decided that
question "based on the provisions of the contract between (petitioner)
and Boston Edison, (Pet. App. 5a).  Under the circumstances of this
case, neither the assumption by the Massachusetts DPU of the burden of
interpreting the contract, nor the interpretation it reached, presents
any question of wider importance.

   A FERC interpretation of the contract would of course have been
binding on the parties and the DPU.  FERC is responsible for ensuring
that all rates or charges made, demanded, or received by any public
utility for or in connection with the transmission or sale or electric
energy in interstate commerce are "just and reasonable" (16 U.S.C.
824d(a)).  The Commission therefore exercise exclusive authority to
set rates and to approve or modify contracts at the wholesale level.
See, e.g., Nantahala, slip op. 10 (quoting Arkansas Louisiana Gas Co.
v. Hall, 453 U.S. 571 581 (1981).  And where FERC has interpreted a
filed rate, and the state is bound to honor it.  See AEP Generating
Co., 38 Fed. Energy Reg. Comm'n Rep. (CCH) Paragraph 61,243, at 61,823
(1987);  AEP Generating Co., 32 Fed. Energy Reg. Comm'n Rep. (CCH)
Paragraph 61,364, at 61,821 (1985), on reh'g, 36 Fed. Energy Reg.
Comm'n Rep. (CCH) Paragraph 61,226, at 61,549-61,550 (1986).  /7/ But
where the Commission has not provided an interpretation, the state may
do so when necessary to fulfill its obligation to set retail rates.
Ibid.  /8/

   A state interpretation that effectively modifies the terms of the
FERC-filed contract would of course be preempted by the federal
regulatory scheme.  /9/ And it may be difficult in some cases to draw
the line between permissible contract interpretation and impermissible
contract modification.  In the present case, the DPU found that
petitioner had, by contract "assumed the risks of ownership" (Pet.
App. 40a), that "in this instance (petitioner) life-of-the-unit
contract creates (in petitioner) the obligations and privileges of a
joint owner" (Pet. App. 41a), and that accordingly peitioner "shares
responsibility for (Boston Edison's) imprudence" (ibid).  The state
court affirmed this reading.  While that is not necessarily the
reading FERC would have endorse had it been presented with this
question of contract interpretation, we cannot conclude that the
result was impermissible (in the absence of a FERC determination to
the contrary) or that it presents any question that merits this
Court's review.  /10/

   2. This case does not present any issue of general significance
under the filed rate and Narragansett doctrines.  As described above,
it arose in an atypical fact situation -- the happenstance that the
same state regulator had jurisdiction, and the opportunity, to
determine, in different retail rate proceedings, both the question of
the mismanagement of the plant by one utility and the question of
imputation of that mismanagement to another utility.  Moreover, the
case turns on the ultimately factual determination of mismanagement
and on the interpretation of a contract that FERC had not had occasion
to interpret.  The case therefore does not warrant an exercise of this
Court's certiorari jurisdiction.

                              CONCLUSION

   The petition for a writ of certiorari should be denied.

   Respectfully Submitted.

   CHARLES FRIED

      Solicitor General

   LOUIS R. COHEN

      Deputy Solicitor General

   JERROLD J. GANZFRIED

      Assistant to the Solicitor General

   CATHERINE C. COOK

      General Counsel

   JEROME M. FEIT

      Solicitor

   JOSHUA Z. ROKACH

   JOHN N. ESTES III

      Attorneys Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

   APRIL 1987

   /1/ The Federal Power Act requires that utilities file with the
Commission "schedules showing all rates and charges for any * * * sale
subject to the jurisdiction of the Commission, and the * * * contracts
which in any manner affect or relate to such rates * * *." 16 U.S.C.
824d(c).  Under the filed rate doctrine, established in Montana-Dakota
Utilities Co. v. Northwestern Public Service Co., 341 U.S. 246,
251-252 (1951), "the right to a different one * * *." Under the
Narragansett doctrine articulated in Narragansett Electric Co. v.
Burke, 119 R.I. 559, 381 A.2d 1358 (1977), cert. denied, 435 U.S. 972
(1978) and endorsed by this Court in Nantahala, a state utility agency
is required to treat such a FERC-filed rate as "reasonable" (see 119
R.I. at 566, 381 A.2d at 1362).

   /2/ The Commission followed its customeary practice of issuing
notice of the proposed filing.  No comments were received, and the
Commission accepted the contract for filing and ruled that it should
become effective as of December 9, 1972.  The Commission did not
purport to interpret the contract or any of its clauses, and it
notified the parties that the acceptance for filing did not constitute
approval of the contract terms.  See Pet. App. 118a-119a.

   /3/ One judge dissented (Pet. App. 23a-26a).  He would have
remanded for the DPU to decide whether FERC had "determined that the
agreement was just and reasonable from the point of view of
Commonwealth" (id. at 25a).  If the state agency found that FERC had
made such a determination, then the dissenting judge would have
concluded that the DPU interpretation of the contract was preempted.

   /4/ We fully agree with petitioner (Pet. 14) that a state may not
"avoid the 'bright line' between federal and state jurisdiction and
the statutory procedure for FERC review of wholesale performance * * *
by discovering imprudence in the chain of electric supply and then
imputing such imprudence to the retail electric company over which it
has jurisdiction * * *." But that is not what happened here:  the DPU
found imprudence in a retail rate proceeding involving a utility
(Boston Edison) over which it had jurisdiction and which it found to
have acted imprudently;  it imputed the imprudence in respect of the
same outage to petitioner because it found warrant for doing so in a
contract that had not yet been interpreted by FERC.  Had Boston Edison
sold power only at wholesale, its right to pass on to its customers
its costs resulting from the outage, and its obligation if any to
reimburse customers for costs incurred by them, could only have been
determined by FERC, which would have had to resolve any question of
plant mismanagement or of contract interpretation necessary to
determine Boston Edison's rights and obligations.  Conversely, had
petitioner been the manager of its own power production facility,
there would be no question of the state's power to deny a retail rate
increase on the basis of a state finding that the facility was
mismanaged.  See, e.g., Violet V. FERC, 800 F.2d 280, 282 (1st Cir.
1986).

   /5/ Petitioner contends (Pet. 19) that it was not afforded an
opportunity to rebut the charge of mismanagement by Boston Edison.
Repondent disputes this as a factual matter (Br. in Opp. 26).  In any
event it does not present an issue that warrants this Court's
consideration.

   /6/ For example, the court stated (Pet. App. 7a n.2) that "actual
or constructive ownership is (not) a prerequisite to imputation of
imprudence to a public utility. * * * It is not the company's
similarity to an owner that is dispositive, however, but its
nondelegable statutory obligations."

   If the court was suggesting that, notwithstanding the terms of a
FERC-filed contract, a utility selling at retail may have a duty under
state law to obtain better terms or performance from its wholesaler
than the contract prescribes, or that it may bear automatic (rather
than contractual) responsibility for its wholesaler's performance, the
suggestion is entirely incorrect.  Any such "nondelegable duty" (see
also id. at 9a n.4) would impeach the FERC-filed contract in a manner
clearly barred by Nantahala.  In this case, however, we read the
court's decision as resting on an interpretation of the contract that
imposes actual or constructive ownership obligations on petitioner;
the suggestion that such a finding would not have been necessary is
erroneous but appears to be dictum.  See Pet. App. 7a & n.2.

   /7/ Petitioner could have sought an interpretation of its contract
from FERC prior to the DPU and state court proceedings and, indeed,
may still do so now.  See, e.g., AEP Generating Co., on reh'g, 36 Fed.
Energy Reg. Comm'n Rep. (CCH) Paragraph 61,226, at 61,551 n.3 ("there
are, and have been, a variety of procedural options available for a
party to solicit such an interpretation.  For example, the utilities
or any affected state commission could have requested a declaratory
order (from FERC) as soon as a disagreement became evident.");
Kentucky Power Co., 36 Fed. Energy Reg. Comm'n Rep. (CCH) Paragragh
61,227, at 61,554 (1986).

   /8/ Should the Commission later interpret a contractual provision
previously interpreted by the state, the federal interpretation would
preempt any conflicting state interpretation (even though the state's
view would have been acceptable and controlling in the absence of
Commission action).  See AEP Generating Co., 38 Fed. Energy Reg.
Comm'n Rep. (CCH) Paragraph 61,243, at 61,823 (1987).

   /9/ In some circumstances, not present here, the Commission
effectively has exclusive jurisdiction over the interpretation of
contracts.  For example, a state would have no role in regulating a
contract for wholesale transactions between the subsidiaries of a
fully integrated holding company.  See AEP Generating Co., 38 Fed.
Energy Reg. Comm'n Rep. (CCH) Paragraph 61,243;  Mississippi
Industries V. FERC, 808 F.2d 1525, 1547-1549 (D.C. Cir. 1987),
petitions for cert. pending, No. 86-1380 (filed Feb. 20, 1987), No.
86-1424 (filed Mar. 4, 1987), reh'g en banc granted on other grounds,
No. 85-1611 (D.C. Cir. Apr. 3, 1987).

   /10/ The state court's rejection of Commonwealth's argument
concerning the outage provision (Section 2.3) may also be justified as
permissible contract interpretation.  Section 2.3 may be read to
govern only the relationship between the two utilities, thus creating
a remedy that Commonwealth could invoke against Boston Edison but not
altering the fact that under the contract Boston Edison and petitioner
shared responsibility for the outage.  While neither the state court
nor the DPU expressly relied on that interpretation of Section 2.3,
they reached the same result that that interpretation would have
produced.

   Both the DPU (Pet. App. 42a n.1) and the state court (id. at
8a-10a) found as a matter of public policy that Commonwealth could not
insulate imprudent plant management from review in retail ratemaking
proceedings.  We do not agree that that proposition would govern in
every case.  For example, if FERC approved a contract or rate schedule
that precluded review of particular subjects in retail ratemaking
proceedings, then state scrutiny of those subjects would be barred.
The question raised by this hypothetical is not, however, present in
this case.

   Finally, this case is not like Arkanasa Louisiana Gas Co. v. Hall,
453 U.S. at 578-579, in which the state court ordered a remedy -- an
actual change in the wholesale rate -- that directly and clearly
conflicted with the rate on file with FERC.
