




Pollen Database Manual





EUROPEAN 
POLLEN 
DATABASE
 
NORTH 
AMERICAN 
POLLEN 
DATABASE



















03 August 1993




1. Introduction	1
1.1. Overview	1
1.2. History	1
1.3. Database Administration	2
1.3.1. European Pollen Database	2
1.3.2. North American Pollen Database	3
1.4. Cooperating Database Projects in Europe	3
2. The Database Management System: Paradox	3
2.1. Overview of Paradox	3
2.1.1. Features	4
2.1.1.1. PC based, hardware requirements	4
2.1.1.2. Forms, reports, scripts	4
2.1.1.3. Table creation, naming tables and fields	4
2.1.2. Data types	5
2.1.3. Keys	5
2.1.4. Configuration to International Sort Order	5
2.1.5. Limitations	5
2.1.6. Common disk directory structure	6
3. The entry of pollen data using Tilia	6
3.1. Requirements, source, and cost	6
3.2. The Tilia Software Package	7
3.2.1. Data entry and importation of data into Tilia	7
3.2.2. Using a master dictionary to create a taxon list	7
3.3. Transferring data between the database and Tilia	8
4. Conventions adopted for the databases	8
4.1. Place names	8
4.2. IGCP-type regions (EPD)	8
4.3. Bibliographic conventions	9
4.4. Alphanumeric data storage	9
4.5. Typographical errors	9
4.6. Italic and bold text	9
4.7. Special characters	9
4.8. Dummy values	9
4.9. The use of terminating punctuation	9
4.10. "Notes" tables	9
5. Differences between the European and North American databases	9
5.1. Internal code numbers	9
5.2. Taxonomy, nomenclature, and synonymy	9
5.3. Restrictions on the use of data	11
6. Overview of the Pollen Database Structure	11
6.1. Categories of Tables	11
6.2. Pollen v. Macrofossil data	11
6.3. Core Tables	11
7. References	12
8. Database Tables and Field Descriptions	12
8.1. Archival Tables	13
WORKERS	13
ADDRESS	13
SITELOC	14
SITEDESC	15
SITEINFO	15
ENTITY	16
P_ENTITY	17
COREDRIV	18
SECTION	18
ENTITY&&	19
GEOCHRON	19
AAR	20
C14	20
ESR	21
FT	21
KAR	22
PB210	22
TL	23
USERIES	23
SYNEVENT	24
EVENT	24
ALSEGS	25
P_ANLDPT	25
DATING&&	26
P_PREP&&	26
P_VARS	27
P_SAMPLE	28
P_COUNTS	29
LITHOLGY	30
LOI	30
PUBL	31
PUBLCIT	31
PUBLENT	32
AUTHORS	32
8.2. Lookup and Referral Tables	33
POLDIV1	33
POLDIV2	33
POLDIV3	33
INFOTYPE	34
DESCR	35
RATIONAL	36
IGCPTYPE	36
8.3. Research Tables	37
P_GROUP	37
GROUPS	37
CHRON	38
AGEBASIS	38
CHRON&&	39
P_AGEDPT	39
P_VTRANS	40
8.4. System Tables	41
SYSIDN	41
SYSCAT	41
SYSCOL	41
SYSIDX	42
SYSFKS	42
DBLOG	43
DBACT	43
DBENT	43
8.5. Views	44
P_VARIS	44
DESCRIS	44
DATATYPS	45


1. Introduction

1.1. Overview

This manual is guide to the European and 
North American Pollen Databases (EPD and 
NAPD). Initiatives to develop pollen databases 
on the two continents began about the same time, 
and close collaboration has developed to make 
the two databases compatible. As a result of this 
collaboration, the databases have the same file 
structure, and are designed so that any software 
developed will work with either database. The 
databases, however, have independent internal 
numbering systems for sites, variables (pollen-
types), and other items. Thus, a pollen-type such 
as Quercus, which occurs on both continents, has 
different system numbers in the two databases. 
The database software is Paradoxr from Borland 
International, which runs on IBM PC or compat-
ible computers. The databases are intended to be 
both archives of pollen and associated data as 
well as important research tools for studies in pa-
laeoecology and palaeoclimatology.

1.2. History

Before the initiation of the NAPD/EPD, 
Thompson Webb III at Brown University had 
already assembled a substantial database of 
pollen counts from North America as part of the 
Cooperative Holocene Mapping Project 
(COHMAP). In Europe, Brian Huntley and John 
Birks had assembled pollen-percentage data at 
given time intervals, which they used for their 
atlas (Huntley and Birks 1983). These databases 
have been used for many valuable palaeoclimatic 
and palaeoecological studies, culminating in the 
COHMAP paper in Science (COHMAP 
Members 1988). Such studies have demonstrated 
not only the extreme value of the pollen 
databases, but also the need for greater 
accessibility and completeness. Also of concern 
are the long-term archiving and curation of 
pollen data, which are usually published in only 
summary or graphical form and whose collection 
is highly labor intensive. These needs and 
concerns fostered the creation of the North 
American and European Pollen Databases.
The need for a European pollen database was 
discussed during the closing session of the Inter-
national Geological Correlation Programme 
(IGCP) 158B project in Krakow, Poland, in June 
1988. Following these preliminary discussions, 
Bj”rn Berglund (Lund, Sweden) and George 
Jacobson (University of Maine, USA), who was 
on sabbatical in Lund, agreed to coordinate a 
workshop to discuss the establishment of a Euro-
pean database. Independently, participants in a 
meeting of the European Commission Palaeocli-
mate Program reached a similar conclusion in Le 
Puy, France, in September 1987. Joel Guiot 
(Marseille, France), Brian Huntley (Durham, 
England) and Colin Prentice (Uppsala, Sweden) 
agreed to initiate the process. In North America, 
Eric Grimm (Illinois State Museum) had been 
having conversations with Tom Webb concerning 
the curation and fate of the COHMAP pollen da-
tabase, including preliminary discussions of a 
grant proposal, although no action had been 
taken.
In May 1989, Berglund, Grimm, Guiot, 
Huntley, and Jacobson met and organized a 
meeting for the following August in Frostavallen, 
Sweden, which palynologists from 18 European 
countries attended. Although the participants 
agreed upon the importance of a database, 
several researchers brought forth a variety of 
practical and ethical problems, some of which 
had been discussed the previous June at the 12th 
European Quaternary Botanists meeting in 
Czechoslovakia. The Frostavallen meeting also 
discussed practical problems concerning the 
housing and financial support of such a database. 
Armand Pons and colleagues Joel Guiot and 
Jacques-Louis de Beaulieu (Marseille) presented 
a proposal, which was subsequently adopted, for 
housing the database at a new Centre 
Universitaire d'Arles in the Monastery of St. 
Trophime in Arles, near Marseille. The meeting 
appointed an Executive Committee, composed of 
Brigitta Ammann (Bern, Switzerland), Armand 
Pons, and W. A. Watts (Dublin, Ireland), who 
were primarily responsible for seeking funds. An 
Advisory Board was also appointed to help with 
regional and taxonomic questions and to consider 
the ethics of the use of data in the database.
Armand Pons succeeded in obtaining finan-
cial support for a database from the European 
Commission's EPOCH Program, which is 
focused upon global climate change during the 
last 30,000 years. The funding period is July 
1990 to July 1993 and a sum of 105,000 ECU 
was obtained by the University of Marseille to 
develop a centre at Arles. The Marseille group 
also obtained from the Conseil Regional de 
Provence-Cote d'Azur approximately 250,000 
FFr for the purchase of computer and office 
equipment. Independently, Brian Huntley 
received a grant from the U. K. Natural 
Environment Research Council to support data 
compilations in Durham for the late-glacial and 
in Cambridge for the last interglacial. These 
compilations were intended to be contributions 
towards the central database and would be 
carried out in close collaboration with the 
database centre in Arles. Additional funds from 
the EPOCH program would also facilitate this 
collaboration. In addition, Brigitta Ammann and 
colleagues from the Alpine region had organized 
an Alpine Pollen Database with funds from a 
Swiss NSF project on long-term vegetation dy-
namics in the Alps.
The EPD Advisory Board and Executive 
Committee met in Wilhelmshaven, Germany, in 
September 1990. The aims of this meeting were 
to resolve some of the practical problems in-
volved in starting the database, to discuss further 
the ethical problems raised at Frostavallen, and 
to propose an organisational structure and 
protocols for the database. Discussions centered 
on the structure of the database, taxonomy, 
synonymy, evaluation of radiocarbon dates, 
linguistic difficulties, and the motivation for the 
database development. It was agreed that the 
central database would cooperate with those 
desiring to develop regional databases, and that 
these in turn would serve as conduits to the 
central database. At the end of the meeting, 
Armand Pons and W. A. Watts resigned from 
the Executive Committee and nominated Jacques-
Louis de Beaulieu and Brian Huntley as their 
successors, which the Advisory Board accepted.
In the United States, the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
initiated a Paleoclimatology Program in its 
agency the National Geophysical Data Center 
(NGDC) as part of its Climate and Global 
Change Program. NOAA/NGDC appointed a 
Paleoclimate Advisory Panel, whose mission was 
to make recommendations for the future of the 
Paleoclimatology Program. The Panel met for 
the first time in June 1989 and recommended that 
acquisition of palaeoclimate proxy data be a 
major priority. It further recommended that 
experts in the various fields should manage the 
data acquisition, rather than NGDC itself. The 
Panel identified the following data areas: 
(1) pollen/packrat midden/macrofossil data, 
(2) tree-ring data, (3) marine and lacustrine 
sediments, (4) documentary and long 
instrumental data sets, (5) ice core and glacier 
records, (6) paleoclimate model output, and 
(7) hydrology/stream/lake-level data. Pursuant to 
these recommendations, NOAA/NGDC solicited 
proposals for development of databases. Eric 
Grimm submitted a successful proposal for the 
development of the North American Pollen 
Database. The project began in August 1990. 
John Keltner was employed as the Database 
designer/programmer, and he has had major 
responsibility for development of database 
software for both the NAPD and EPD. The 
NAPD also has an Advisory Board of 
palynologists representing different geographic 
regions and with a broad range of expertise.
Keltner and Grimm created an initial design 
for the database, which they presented to the first 
NAPD Advisory Board Meeting in November 
1990. In January 1991, Grimm and Keltner met 
with several technical advisors and coordinators 
of the EPD (Brigitta Ammann, J.-L. de Beaulieu, 
John Birks, Sytze Bottema, Mike Field, Annabel 
Gear, Joel Guiot, Brian Huntley, Steve Juggins) 
in Arles. This workshop resulted in substantial 
modification of the database structure to 
accommodate both North American and 
European idiosyncrasies, as well as to 
accommodate other kinds of data, such as plant 
macrofossils, and diatoms. The participants 
agreed that any future modifications would be 
made to both databases after joint consultation.

1.3. Database Administration

1.3.1. European Pollen Database

Location	Centre Universitaire 
d'Arles, Arles, France
Coordinators	J.-L. de Beaulieu
	Joel Guiot
Postdoctoral Scientist	Rachid Cheddadi



Executive Committee

J.-L. de Beaulieu, Marseille, France
Brian Huntley, Durham, England
Brigitta Ammann, Bern, Switzerland

Advisory Board

Karl-Ernst Behre, Wilhelmshaven, Germany
H. J. B. Birks, Bergen, Norway
Elizaveta Bozilova, Sofia, Bulgaria
Maria Follieri, Rome, Italy
M.-J. Gaillard-Lemdahl. Lund, Sweden
George L. Jacobson Jr., Orono, Maine, USA
C. R. Janssen, Utrecht, Netherlands
Meilute Kabailiene, Vilnius, Lithuania
M. Ralska-Jasiewiczowa. Cracow, Poland

1.3.2 North American Pollen Database

Location	Illinois State Museum, 
Springfield, Illinois
Administrator	Eric C. Grimm
Designer/Programmer	John Keltner

Advisory Board

Konrad J. Gajewski, Universit‚ Laval
George L. Jacobson Jr., University of Maine
Glen M. MacDonald, McMaster University
Louis J. Maher, University of Wisconsin
Vera Markgraf, INSTAAR
Pierre Richard, Universit‚ de Montr‚al
Thompson Webb III, Brown University
Cathy Whitlock, University of Oregon

1.4. Cooperating Database Projects in 
Europe

1. Eastern Mediterranean database coordinated 
by Sytze Bottema (Groningen) as part of the 
EPOCH project on Global climate change of the 
last 30,000 years.

2. 9000-15,000 B.P. ('late-glacial') of Europe 
coordinated by Annabel Gear and Brian Huntley 
(Durham) as part of their project on European 
Palaeoclimate during the last deglaciation.

3. Last interglacial of Europe coordinated by 
Mike Field (Cambridge), Phil Gibbard 
(Cambridge) and Brian Huntley, as part of their 
project on Palaeoclimate and vegetation develop-
ment during the last interglacial in Europe.

4. The Alpine Database, which is part of a larger 
project focused on long-term vegetational 
dynamics in the Alps and immediate 
surroundings coordinated by Brigitta Ammann, 
H. J. B. Birks, Otto Hegg (Bern), Steve Juggins 
(London), Felix Kienast (Zurich), and Pim van 
der Knapp (Bern). This database was conceived 
before the EPD and was not originally designed 
to be an integral component of it. However, it is 
attempting to achieve compatibility with the EPD 
in terms of database design and software, 


2. The Database Management 
System: Paradoxr

2.1. Overview of Paradox

Paradox from Borland International is a Re-
lational Database Management System (RDBMS) 
for MS-DOS based microcomputers. An 
RDBMS is one that claims adherence to the 
relational model of data management (see Codd 
1970, 1985, 1990; Date 1990). Users of an 
RDBMS perceive their data as a set of tables, 
and only as a set of tables. Tables represent 
classes of real-world objects; they are the 
familiar two-dimensional structures consisting of 
columns (or fields) that contain exactly one type 
of information and rows (or records) that 
represent individual instances of the table class. 
For example, a table designed to store 
information about sites and their locations might 
contain columns for the site's name, its latitude, 
and its longitude. Individual rows in this table 
would then store the name, latitude, and 
longitude for a single site; each row is an 
instance of the site-location class.
Every row in an RDBMS table should be 
unique. Thus, some set of values, drawn from 
one or more columns, should distinguish each 
row from all other rows. The set of columns 
whose values uniquely identify each row in a 
table defines the primary key for that table. The 
combination of table name, column name, and 
primary key gives each cell in a table a unique 
address. The columns comprising the primary 
key are specified when a table is first created. 
With Paradox, this is done by listing the primary 
key columns in sequence at the top of the table 
and adding an asterisk to each column's data type 
specification (see below). If a primary key is 
subsequently modified, any duplicate rows (rows 
with identical values in each of their primary key 
columns) are removed from that table and placed 
in a new table named, KEYVIOL.
This last point illustrates a fundamental prop-
erty of an RDBMS, namely that all operations 
produce new tables from old ones. To create or 
modify a table, you specify its structure in a 
STRUCT table. Modifying the structure of a 
table may, as noted above, produce a KEYVIOL 
table. Viewing a table produces a read-only copy 
of that table. Editing a table produces a copy of 
that table that will replace the existing table when 
you make the changes final (when you DO_IT!, 
in Paradox). Querying a database produces an 
ANSWER table. Deleting rows from a table 
using a query form produces a new table with the 
deleted rows removed to a DELETED table. Any 
of these tables, except STRUCT, may be empty 
(contain zero rows).

2.1.1. Features
2.1.1.1. PC based, hardware requirements
Paradox version 3.5 runs on any 100% IBM-
compatible personal computer with one hard disk 
and a floppy drive, with >= 512 kb or more of 
internal memory (RAM), MS-DOS >= 2.0 and 
a monochrome or colour monitor.

2.1.1.2. Forms, reports, scripts
Paradox provides tools for organising the 
collection, retrieval, and display of data. These 
tools include report and forms generators, and a 
programming language that is an extension of the 
Paradox interface and whose scripts (programs) 
are played (run) from the interface.
Forms allow a user to see only the data 
needed for a particular task, whether that task is 
data entry, editing, or merely viewing. This 
keeps the actual complexity of the database out 
of sight and out of the way. A form may contain 
selected information from one or more tables, 
text for titles or prompts, display only or 
calculated fields. With forms, the presentation of 
the database becomes more consistent and reli-
able.
Reports are the means for producing printed 
output of selected data in the database. Paradox 
reports may be arranged in almost any manner. 
They may include titles and other text, calculated 
fields, groupings, and much more. Users can de-
sign custom reports or use defaults. Custom re-
ports can be saved and reused or modified.
Scripts are executable programs written in 
PAL (the Paradox Application Language). Play-
ing a script may invoke a complete, complex 
application or a simple, keystroke-saving macro. 
The former is created using a text editor and 
PAL commands, whereas the latter are usually 
created using Paradox's macro recording 
capabilities. Scripts have an important role in 
providing an interface between the user and the 
underlying database. Common tasks should 
always be placed under the control of tested and 
trusted scripts. Like forms, scripts provide the 
user with a consistent and helpful interface that 
restricts the view of the database to just those 
data required to complete a given task. With 
scripts, data can be filtered (for example, 
converted to all uppercase) where appropriate, 
saving the user from having to remember details 
of data formatting. 
Scripts have a further role in database 
maintenance: they can help protect the database 
from inadvertent errors. Simple changes often 
have side-effects that are easily overlooked when 
directly manipulating the tables. Scripts are the 
best way to remember such side-effects. Lastly, 
although a poorly written script can corrupt the 
database as thoroughly as any user, repairing the 
damage caused by a script is easier since the 
nature of the damage is more readily assessed. 
All routine interactions with the database 
should be mediated with PAL scripts.

2.1.1.3. Table creation, naming tables and 
fields
A table is created by assigning it a name and 
then listing the names and data types of each of 
its columns. To Paradox, table names are one to 
eight, alphanumeric characters, and follow the 
rules for MS-DOS file names; case is ignored. 
Column names may be up to 25 alphanumeric 
characters in length, embedded spaces are al-
lowed; again, names are not case sensitive.

2.1.2. Data types
The database structure is documented table 
by table in section 8, below. For each table the 
fields are listed, along with an indication of their 
data type and brief indication of what they 
contain. 
Data types (also called field types) must be 
one of the following:

S	=	a short integer (-32766 <= x <= 
32767).
N	=	a floating point number (15 significant 
digits, 10-307 <= x <= 10+308 )
An	=	an alphanumeric string with a fixed 
length of n characters (1 <= n <= 
255). The string can include letters, 
numbers, and special symbols.
D	=	a date between 1 Jan 100 and 31 Dec 
9999.
$	=	currency. These differ from floating 
point numbers only in their default 
display.

2.1.3. Keys
All tables in the database have a Primary 
key. Additionally, some tables have Alternate 
and Foreign keys. Primary keys uniquely 
identify each row in a table; an Alternate key is 
any other column (or combination of columns) 
that could also uniquely identify each row; it is 
an alternate primary key. A Foreign key is any 
column (or combination of columns) whose non-
null values are constrained to be values in the 
primary key of some table (possibly the same 
table).
By way of example, the Pollen Database site 
location table (SITELOC) has a primary key 
made up of a single, integer-valued column 
(Site#). Paradox guarantees that the value in this 
column for every row in the table will be unique. 
SITELOC has a column for site name, whose 
values should also be unique; SiteName is an Al-
ternate key. SITELOC also has a column, 
PolDiv1, that stores a code for the country where 
a site is located (e.g. USA). The non-null values 
in the PolDiv1 column are constrained to be 
values that currently exist as the primary key of 
some row in table POLDIV1 (i.e. there must be 
a record for USA in table POLDIV1). Column 
PolDiv1 is designated a foreign key referencing 
table POLDIV1. A table that meets all foreign 
key constraints is said to have referential 
integrity. Unfortunately, Paradox provides no 
direct support for maintaining alternate keys and 
referential integrity.

2.1.4. Configuration to International Sort 
Order
Paradox arranges or selects records in a cer-
tain order, which must be either: ASCII, Nor-
wegian/Danish, Swedish/Finnish or 
International. By agreement, all pollen databases 
use International sort order. "In this sort order, 
capital, lowercase and special characters are 
combined into a unified sequence. This means 
that records are sorted according to their 
alphanumeric positions, regardless of case or 
diacritical marks. Characters representing 
ligatures are also sorted correctly (that is,  as 
"ue")" p. 279 Paradox 3.5 Users Guide. Sort or-
der affects the primary key ordering of records 
in a table, the ordering of records in the 
ANSWER table, the result of using the SORT 
command, and the answers to queries that use 
selection operators (<,>, <=, >=).

It is essential that Paradox is configured to the 
International sort order during installation 
(see p. 31 of the Paradox 3.5 Users Guide) and 
that it is not changed thereafter.

2.1.5. Limitations
Although Paradox has great advantages such 
as widespread availability, low-cost, and ease-of-
use, it is not without its limitations as well. Chief 
among these are the lack of a central system 
catalogue for the database, no support for main-
taining the consistency of alternate and foreign 
keys, and no provision for transaction logging or 
rollback. Unfortunately, these highly desirable 
features are currently available only on mini- and 
mainframe systems, and at a considerable price. 
The alternative to having such features built into 
an RDBMS is to emulate them with external 
software and to use this software diligently to 
check the status of the database.
A system catalogue stores information about 
each table in the database. It stores information 
on the names, data types, and domains for each 
column. It stores information on a table's 
primary key as well as information on any 
alternate and foreign keys that a table has. A set 
of system tables (e.g. SYSCAT) have been 
created for the Pollen Database to stand-in for a 
DBMS-managed system catalogue. These tables, 
in conjunction with a set of system scripts 
provide Pollen Database administrators with the 
ability to check alternate and foreign key 
integrity, as well as the specifications of primary 
keys and column data types.
Database Directory Structure
C:\
|--...
|--PDB		;parent directory for pollen database
	|--DB	;database tables (e.g. SITELOC.DB)
	|--DBV	;database views (e.g. P_VARIS.DB)
	|--DOC	;documentation files (e.g. PDM.DOC)
	|--EXE	;DOS executables (e.g. PD2TIL.EXE)
	|--SC	;parent directory for scripts
		|--CMN	;script modules used by many scripts (e.g. DTYPE.SC)
		|--DB	;base table scripts (e.g. PD2TIL.SC)
		|--...
		|--SYS	;system table scripts (e.g. CHECK_DB.SC)
	|--...
	|--SYS	;system tables (e.g. SYSCAT.DB)
	|--TMP	;temporary tables, error report files
Transaction logging means keeping a record 
of all actions that affect the content of the data-
base: every insertion, deletion, or update. The 
existence of such a log, obviously, greatly 
facilitates recovery from simple data entry errors 
or such catastrophes as power failures and file 
damage. A transaction is any series of actions on 
a database that must occur in its entirety or not at 
all. Should a transaction fail, for whatever 
reason, rollback means playing the log in reverse 
until the database is returned to its pre-
transaction state. Implementing transaction 
logging and rollback in application software 
would be both complicated and time-consuming. 
Adding such a facility may be worth considering 
for the most routinely used or critical 
applications. Alternatively, frequent, incremental 
backups of the database may be a more 
appropriate and achievable solution - the worst 
catastrophes may then be limited to a few days 
lost work.

2.1.6. Common disk directory structure
The database uses a standard directory struc-
ture (the actual disk drive used is not mandated).


3. The entry of pollen data using 
Tilia

3.1. Requirements, source, and cost

While the totality of pollen data is best man-
aged using an RDBMS, the data for a single site 
are much more conveniently manipulated and 
displayed using the MS-DOS-based applications, 
Tilia and Tilia graph, written by Dr. Eric 
Grimm. This software requires an IBM PC or 
compatible computer, MS-DOS 3.0 or higher, 
640 kb of conventional memory, and a graphics 
display for Tilia graph. Tilia is available free of 
charge; Tilia graph costs 250 US$. Both are 
available from Eric Grimm at the Illinois State 
Museum, Research and Collections Center, 1920 
South 10« Street, Springfield, IL  62703, USA.


3.2. The Tilia Software Package

The Tilia Software Package consists of a set 
of programs for manipulating, analyzing, and 
graphing stratigraphic data. The programs are 
particularly designed for pollen data, but can be 
used for a wide variety of stratigraphic, geologic, 
and ecological data. The programs are all menu 
driven.
Tilia is a spreadsheet program designed es-
pecially for stratigraphic data. Data can be en-
tered, deleted, and easily rearranged. The user 
can define up to 26 different sums or groups, and 
percentages can be based on any sum. The 
program can read and write a variety of different 
ASCII formats, and the program will assign ages 
to levels by one of three options: linear 
interpolation, fitting a polynomial, or a spline 
curve. Radiocarbon or other ages can be entered. 
The program can also calculate concentrations 
and accumulation rates. A standard dictionary of 
variable names can be maintained. The 
dictionary can be loaded or linked, so that 
variable lists do not have to be repeatedly 
reentered.
CONISS carries out cluster analysis 
according to the incremental sum of squares 
method (also known as Ward's method, 
minimum variance, error sums of squares). The 
analysis can be stratigraphically constrained and, 
therefore, a method for numerical zonation. The 
program is accessible from Tilia.
CA performs correspondence analysis and 
detrended correspondence analysis. The program 
is accessible from Tilia.
Tilia graph plots pollen diagrams or other 
stratigraphic data, and is accessible from Tilia. 
The program has a default format, and a spread-
sheet of pollen frequencies can be viewed as a 
pollen diagram with only a few keystrokes. The 
user has a high degree control over the diagram 
format. Graphs may be plotted as silhouette 
curves, histograms, presence/absence, or raw 
numbers. Curves can be filled with a variety of 
patterns or depth bars, and exaggerated curves 
can also be plotted (the exaggeration is defined 
by the user). The user can define the width of 
histogram bars, which can be filled with a 
pattern. Cumulative or overlaid graphs can also 
be plotted. The user can scale both the horizontal 
and vertical axes; define major, minor, and 
labeled tic marks; and enter axis labels. If the 
data are plotted against depth, the program will 
optionally plot an age axis correctly scaled, or 
vice versa. Graph names can be plotted at any 
angle from 0 to 90 . Zone boundaries and labels 
can be plotted. A variety of fonts are available.

3.2.1. Data entry and importation of data 
into Tilia
Tilia is able  to read files that are in any of 
the following formats: Brown, Cambridge 
(POLLDATA output), Marseille, Minnesota and 
Wisconsin and WK1 or WKS. In addition, Ian 
Shennan of Durham University (England) has 
written a program that converts files input using 
his pollen program into Tilia format. The 
following instructions briefly describe how data 
that have previously been entered in 
POLLDATA format can be loaded into Tilia and 
assigned either the EPD or NAPD variable 
numbers (Var#):

1.	At the DOS prompt type Tilia.
2.	At the main menu choose option [D] "Load 
data file", [C] "Cambridge format", "Name of 
input file", e.g. MORRONE.CAM. 
3.	Option [E] "Load dictionary", [B] "Match 
dictionary to data", "Name of input file", e.g. 
EPD.DIC, and then [A] "Match to variable 
names".
4.	Option [G] "Edit dictionary", edit the diction-
ary inserting the correct numeric codes for 
synonyms, etc. Then use F4 to save the dic-
tionary to a file, e.g. SITEDIC. After this step 
all numeric codes should be consistent with 
the EPD.
5.	Option [E], "Load dictionary", "Name of dic-
tionary", e.g. EPD.DIC, [B] "Match 
dictionary to data", [D] "Match numeric 
codes".

3.2.2. Using a master dictionary to create 
a pollen taxon list
Before pollen data for an individual site can 
be entered into Tilia a pollen variable list needs 
to be compiled. Master dictionaries exist that 
include all the pollen variables listed in either the 
EPD (presently >1000 pollen variables) or the 
NAPD, and their associated numeric, 8 and 2 
character codes. As most sites contain fewer than 
120 pollen variables the spread sheet would be 
too cumbersome if these dictionaries were loaded 
into the spreadsheet.
Providing that a master dictionary is present 
(e.g. EPD.DIC) then by using the following pro-
cedures the necessary pollen variable names and 
their associated codes can be quickly compiled 
from the master dictionary for individual sites:

1.	At the DOS prompt type Tilia.
2.	At the main menu choose option [F] "Link 
dictionary". This does not actually load the 
dictionary into the spreadsheet, but makes it 
available to it.
3.	Option [A] "Link TILIA dictionary", "Name 
of dictionary", e.g. EPD.
4.	Option [A] "Spreadsheet".
5.	To add a pollen type to the current 
spreadsheet, press F9, then either (1) enter the 
two-letter code, or (2) press F9, then either 
(a) enter the two-letter code, or (b) hit F9 
again and a scrolling window appears for 
selecting the variable. The variable is then 
added to the spreadsheet with all its 
information, i.e. group code, name, etc. when 
you press Enter.
6.	When in the current spread sheet use Ctrl + 
D to edit the dictionary. 

3.3. Transferring data between the data-
base and Tilia
Paradox scripts are available for moving data 
between the Pollen Database and Tilia. These 
scripts, titled PD2TIL and TIL2PD, directly read 
data to and from Tilia .TIL file format. Note that 
TIL2PD uses the data in the .TIL file to replace 
existing data in the database, and that once re-
placed, the existing information is not 
retrievable; no backups are made. Consult the 
latest Pollen Database Scripts Catalogue (PDSC) 
for announcements of current releases.


4. Conventions adopted for the data-
bases

4.1. Place names

Country names and codes follow the ISO 
standard (3166) for the representation of names 
of countries, dependencies and areas of special 
sovereignty and have been entered into table 
POLDIV1. In addition, GER has been assigned 
for Germany until a new code is officially as-
signed by the Swiss National Bureau of Stan-
dards. Codes for the new states in eastern Europe 
will be added when they become available.
The NAPD second political subdivisions are 
states or provinces. Two character codes have 
been assigned from the U.S. Department of 
Commerce FIPS PUB 10-3. In Europe a list is 
currently being compiled of all the major 
political subdivisions of countries (i.e. Vice 
Counties in the UK., D‚partments in France etc.) 
and a map is being prepared that will depict the 
boundaries between each of these areas. Two 
character codes have begun to be assigned to 
these subdivisions and can be looked up in table 
POLDIV2.
The NAPD third political subdivisions are 
counties or census areas. In Europe, minor politi-
cal subdivisions (parishes, townships etc.) are so 
numerous that they are only being entered into 
the database as necessary. These codes can be 
found in table POLDIV3.

4.2. IGCP type regions (EPD)

The International Geological Correlation 
Programme Project 158B subdivided the 
following countries into "type regions, which are 
uniform areas as regards geology, morphology, 
climate and biota" (Magdalena Ralska-
Jasiewiczowa, 1986 p. 1): Austria, Belgium, 
Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland, 
France, Germany, Great Britain, Greenland, The 
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Sweden, 
Switzerland, and some areas of the USSR 
including Kola, Karelian, Estonia, Latvia, 
Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine and Moldavia.
The IGCP catalogue includes a series of 
maps which indicate the type region boundaries, 
and a set of codes which uniquely identify each 
region. These codes are cross-referenced to the 
look-up table IGCPTYPE.

4.3. Bibliographic conventions

Bibliographic references will be entered and 
formatted following the conventions used in the 
journal Ecology. The Council of Biology Editors 
Style Manual is followed for details of style and 
presents "rules, rationale, principles, definitions 
and examples to assist in formulating biblio-
graphic references from a wide variety of materi-
als" (p. 55).

4.4. Alphanumeric data storage

Alphanumeric codes (e.g. field PolDiv1 of 
table SITELOC) are uppercase. 

4.5. Typographical errors

Typographical errors in published data will 
be corrected when entered into the database. For 
example, a sampling device described as a 
"modified Livingston", will be entered as 
"modified Livingstone".

4.6. Italic and bold text

Italic and bold text are presently unavailable 
in Paradox. To enter bibliographic references in 
Ecology format, italic or bold entries will be 
flagged as follows:
	Italic text:	alt 174 et al alt 175 
	Bold text:	alt 169 and alt 170. 

4.7. Special characters

It is sometimes necessary to use special char-
acters when entering text or workers' names. A 
list of the ASCII special characters that are avail-
able for data entry can be found on p. 280 of the 
Paradox 3.5 Users Guide. Notes are being made 
of characters that are not available .


4.8. Dummy values

When data are not available the field may be 
temporarily flagged with a dummy or nominal 
value (e.g. "0" for latitude or longitude).

4.9. The use of terminating punctuation

It is best that punctuation at the end of an en-
try be omitted, as this can easily be inserted by 
the use of a script. This applies, for example, to 
the period at the end of the last line of the 
address.

4.10. "Notes" tables

The Pollen Database provides several tables 
for storing general, catchall information that is 
otherwise not provided for in the design of the 
database. The names of these tables end with 
"&&". Notes are any number of 60 character 
lines of text, keyed to an entity.


5. Differences between the European 
and North American databases

5.1. Internal code numbers

The database structure is the same for both 
the NAPD and the EPD. However, internal code 
numbers for sites (Site#), entities (E#), pollen 
variables (Var#), worker names (Worker#), and 
publications (Publ#) are independently assigned 
from Arles for the EPD and from Springfield for 
the NAPD.

5.2. Taxonomy, nomenclature, and synon-
ymy

Three kinds of synonymy exist: nomenclatu-
ral, syntactic, and morphological.  The Database 
has nomenclatural and syntactic conventions, and 
will substitute nomenclatural or syntactic syno-
nyms for contributors' names that do no conform 
to these conventions.  In general, the Database 
will not change names based on morphological 
synonymy.
Nomenclatural synonymy refers to botanical 
nomenclature. The NAPD follows Cronquist 
(1981) and floras conforming to this authority, 
including Gleason and Cronquist (1991) and 
Flora of the Great Plains (1986), which cover the 
northeastern and central parts of the continent. 
The nomenclature of these floras has precedence 
over those used for other parts of the continent. 
Examples of nomenclatural synonymy in North 
America are Poaceae = Gramineae, Asteracae 
subfam. Asteroideae = Compositae subfam. 
Tubuliflorae, and Alnus incana = Alnus rugosa. 
The EPD follows Flora Europaea (Tutin et al. 
1964-1980) for the Pteridophyta and 
Spermatophyta, with the exception of taxa that 
are not native to Europe, which follow Willis 
(1985), Smith (1980, 1990) for the Bryophyta, 
Prescott (1969) for the green and red algae, and 
Ainsworth et al. (1973, 1983) for the Eumycota.
Syntactic synonymy refers to nomenclatural 
syntax and applies particularly to the non-Latin 
parts of pollen-type names. The language of the 
database will be English. Some examples of syn-
tactic conventions are:

Ambrosia-type rather than Ambrosia type or Am-
brosia (type)
Ostrya/Carpinus rather than Ostrya-Carpinus
Pinguicula cf. P. villosa rather than Pinguicula 
cf. villosa

Morphological synonymy refers to different 
but valid nomenclatural and syntactic names ap-
plied to the same morphological pollen type. 
Morphological synonyms often have a geographi-
cal ingredient. Examples in North America are 
Fraxinus nigra-type = Fraxinus quadrangulata-
type and Larix = Pseudotsuga.
No attempt has been made to determine pol-
len-morphological synonyms. It is recognized 
that the association of a pollen-morphological 
taxon with a particular plant taxon, or group of 
taxa, is a matter of subjective interpretation, 
because it is unlikely that the present 
biogeography had prevailed in the past. 
Nevertheless, it is common to apply different 
nomenclature to morphologically 
indistinguishable pollen taxa when working in 
different geographical regions because the asso-
ciated plant taxa had limited geographical ranges. 
As a matter of principle as much information is 
being preserved as possible, even at the expense 
of long taxon lists that contain many pollen-mor-
phological synonyms. In the interest of somewhat 
limiting the number of morphological synonyms, 
the database administrator may suggest possible 
morphological synonyms to data contributors for 
their approval. The ultimate decision on morpho-
logical taxonomy is that of the contributor, how-
ever. The development of a uniform taxonomy 
and nomenclature for the North American and 
European pollen-morphological taxa is perhaps a 
desirable long-term goal, but in the short-term 
only botanical nomenclatural and syntactic con-
ventions are being imposed. 
Both databases have adopted the following 
syntactic conventions

	Type
	Type should always be hyphenated e.g. -
type. Exceptions: Armeria (type A), Armeria 
(type B), Artemisia norvegica (type 1)

	cf.
	Form is Genus cf. Genus species, but Family 
cf. Genus.  For example, Betula cf. B. nana 
and Oleaceae cf. Phillyrea

	Genus/Genus-type is not acceptable
	For example, Malus/Mespilus-type should be 
either Malus/Mespilus or Malus-type or 
Mespilus-type.

	Genus-type/Genus-type is not acceptable

	Genus indeterminable or Genus indet. is 
not acceptable
	For example, Plantago indeterminable = 
Plantago undiff.

	spp. is not acceptable
	Genus undiff. or family name (having 
checked with the author where necessary)

	s.l. (sensu lato)
	Elymus s.l. = Elymus-type


5.3. Restrictions on the use of data

EPD data will be classified as restricted or 
unrestricted. Although all data will be 
distributed, that marked as restricted can only be 
used with the permission of the originator. 


6. Overview of the Pollen Database 
Structure

6.1. Categories of Tables

The Pollen Database is ambitious in the 
scope of data it seeks to archive. Furthermore, 
good database design favors a larger number of 
tables each with a few fields, rather than a 
smaller number of tables each with many fields. 
Tables are then linked together by like fields for 
data retrieval. The Pollen Database presented 
below comprises over 300 fields of data 
organized into approximately 60 tables, with 
each table containing a different kind of data. 
Although such numbers must at first seem 
daunting, understanding the database is 
simplified by an awareness of the relationships 
between the different categories of tables, and 
the realisation that the core data are stored in a 
relatively small number of tables. 
Five categories of table can be distinguished: 
Archival, Look-up, Research, System, and 
View. Archival tables store the data reported on 
each site, data that are not expected to change 
once entered into the database, except to add 
missing information or to correct errors. 
SITELOC is an Archival table that stores the 
locational information on sites. Look-up tables 
save space and reduce errors in the database by 
collecting repeatedly used items in a single place. 
Other tables then reference these items using 
short numbers or codes. For example, the 
POLDIV1 table contains names and three 
character codes for all countries. Space is saved 
in the SITELOC and WORKERS tables by 
storing just the country code and not the full 
country name. Research tables store data that 
are derived by manipulation from the Archival 
tables or else are of an interpretive or subjective 
nature. Such data are expected to change or be 
supplemented.  Users are likely to develop a va-
riety of research tables, apart from those initially 
provided for, according to the requirements of 
their projects. It is envisaged that applications 
software be developed initially to allow a few ba-
sic research tables to be generated by the user, 
but that in Europe the distributed database will 
not be accompanied by any centrally-developed 
research tables. P_AGEDPT is an example of a 
Research table, it stores the estimated ages for 
samples in a profile calculated from the 
radiocarbon or other age determinations. System 
tables are used by application programs to help 
maintain the integrity of the data in the database. 
They store a description of the structure of the 
Pollen Database, including the names of all 
tables and columns, and the composition of 
primary, alternate, and foreign keys. The 
SYSCAT table stores the name and category of 
each table in the Pollen Database. Views contain 
information that is derived from other existing 
tables or views, making it more convenient to 
access. Pollen Database tables such as P_VARS 
and DESCR store hierarchical information that is 
subsequently used to derive views for the quick 
retrieval of hierarchical relationships (P_VARIS 
and DESCRIS).

6.2. Pollen v. Macrofossil data

A set of parallel tables that store analogous 
data have been designed to allow for the 
recording of plant and macrofossil data. Where 
available, this information will be included in the 
EPD. These tables are distinguished by the 
prefixes "P_" for pollen data, and "M_" for 
macrofossil data. For example, both the 
P_ENTITY and M_ENTITY tables hold 
additional information about an entity (e.g. a 
core). Two tables are used rather than one 
because P_ENTITY stores pollen-specific data 
and M_ENTITY stores macrofossil-specific data 
(e.g. the year that the analysis was completed for 
a given entity, which might not be the same 
where both types of data were analyzed). 

6.3. Core Tables

The Archival tables form the core of the 
database. The most important and frequently 
used of these are:

SITELOC stores the name and location of the 
site.
ENTITY stores the name and description of the 
entity (i.e. core, section, or surface sample).
GEOCHRON stores the depths and the material 
dated for geochronological dates.
C14 stores the reported radiocarbon dates.
P_SAMPLE stores the sample depths.
P_COUNTS stores the pollen counts.
P_VARS stores the names and codes of all 
Pollen Database variables.
PUBLCIT stores the full bibliographic citations.
WORKERS stores the names of workers - 
persons responsible for data, analysts, etc.

Research tables store the product of the database. 
The most important of these are:

CHRON stores the name of the preparer of the 
chronology, the date it was prepared, and the 
model used to derive the age-depths.
AGEBASIS stores the complete dating informa-
tion used to produce the age-depth curve.
P_AGEDPT stores the pollen age-depths and 
deposition times derived from the selected 
age-model.


7. References

Ainsworth, G. C., F. K. Sparrow, and A. S. 
Sussman. 1973. The fungi: an advanced trea-
tise. Academic Press, London, England.
Ainsworth, G. C. 1983. Dictionary of fungi. 
Seventh edition. Commonwealth Mycological 
Institute, Kew. 
Borland International. 1990. Paradox 3.5 User's 
Guide. Borland International, Scotts Valley, 
CA, USA.
Codd, E. F. 1970. A relational model of data for 
large shared data banks. Communications of 
the Association for Computing Machinery 
13:377-387.
Codd, E. F. 1985. Is your DBMS really rela-
tional? Computerworld, October 14 and 21.
Codd, E. F.  1990. The Relational Model for 
Database Management. Version 2. Addison-
Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, USA.
COHMAP Members. 1988. Climatic changes of 
the last 18,000 years: observations and model 
simulations. Science 241:1043-1052.
Council of Biology Editors 1983. The CBE Style 
Manual. Fifth edition. American Institute of 
Biological Sciences, Washington, D.C., USA.
Cronquist, A. 1981. An integrated system of 
classification of flowering plants. Columbia 
University Press, New York, New York, 
USA.
Date, C. J. 1990. An Introduction to Database 
Systems. Fifth edition. Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, Massachusetts, USA.
Gleason, H. A., and A. Cronquist. 1991. 
Manual of vascular plants of northeastern 
United States and adjacent Canada. Second 
edition. New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, 
New York, USA.
Great Plains Flora Association. 1986. Flora of 
the Great Plains. University Press of Kansas, 
Lawrence, Kansas, USA.
Huntley, B., and H. J. B. Birks. 1983. An atlas 
of past and present pollen maps for Europe 
0-13,000 years ago. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, England.
Prescott, G. W. 1969. The algae: a review. Nel-
son, London, England.
Ralska-Jasiewiczowa, M., editor. 1985. 
Palaeohydrological changes in the temperate 
zone in the last 15,000 years. Subproject B. 
Lake and Mire Environments. International 
Geological Correlation Programme Project 
158B.
Smith, A. G. 1980. The moss flora of Britain 
and Ireland. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, England.
Smith, A. G. 1990. The liverworts of Britain and 
Ireland. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, England.
Tutin, T.G. 1964-1980. Flora Europaea. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 
England.
Willis, J. C. 1985. A dictionary of the flowering 
plants and ferns. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, England.


8. Database Tables and Field 
Descriptions



8.1. Archival Tables

TABLE WORKERS	Names of workers.

The WORKERS table is an Archival table that stores the names of all workers known to the Pollen 
Database. The mailing addresses of workers are stored separately, in the ADDRESS table.

	FIELDS	(	Worker#	S
			WorkerIs#	S
			Status	A1
			LastName	A30
			Initials	A10
			FirstName	A15
			Suffix	A5
			Title	A10
			Country	A3
			Phone	A20
			Fax	A20
			EMailAddr	A40 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Worker# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Country ) references POLDIV1.
		(	WorkerIs# ) references WORKERS.

Worker#	Unique identifier for the name of each worker.
WorkerIs#	Identifier for the name currently used by the worker. This number is the same as 
Worker#, except where the worker has changed his or her name.
Status	One character code for the status of worker. It must be one of the following: 
A=Active, I=Inactive, D=Deceased, U=Unknown.
LastName	Last name of the worker. Name prefixes, particles, articles, and prepositions will be 
retained and placed in Ecology style according to guidelines suggested by the 5th 
edition of the CBE Style Manual.
Initials	Full initials of the worker, without spacing (e.g. "E.C.").
FirstName	First name of the worker.
Suffix	Suffix for the worker's name (e.g. "III").
Title	Title of the worker (e.g. "Dr.").
Country	Three character code for the worker's country of residence.
Phone	Telephone number, including the international code (e.g. "44 091 3743741").
Fax	FAX number, including the international code (e.g. "33 90 939803").
EMailAddr	Electronic mail address.


TABLE ADDRESS	Addresses of workers.

The ADDRESS table is an Archival table that stores addresses of workers. Addresses are stored as any 
number of 65 character lines of text.

	FIELDS	(	Worker#	S
			Line#	S
			Address	A65 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Worker#, Line# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Worker# ) references WORKERS.

Worker#	Identifier for the worker.
Line#	Unique identifier for each line of the address.
Address	Text of the address line.


TABLE SITELOC	Site location information.

The SITELOC table is an Archival table that stores information on sites, their names and locations.

	FIELDS	(	Site#	S
			SiteName	A40
			SiteCode	A14
			SiteExists	A5
			PolDiv1	A3
			PolDiv2	A2
			PolDiv3	A3
			Latitude	N
			Longitude	N
			UTM	A13
			Elevation	S
			AreaOfSite	N )
	PRIMARY KEY 	(	Site# )
	ALTERNATE KEY	(	SiteName )
		(	SiteCode )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	PolDiv1 ) references POLDIV1.
		(	PolDiv1, PolDiv2 ) references POLDIV2.
		(	PolDiv1, PolDiv2, PolDiv3 ) references POLDIV3.

Site#	Unique identifier for the site.
SiteName	Unique name by which the site is generally known (e.g. "La Grande Pile"). Modifiers 
are added in square brackets, if necessary, to make the site name unique. Political 
division names are preferred as modifiers (e.g. "Devils Lake [Wisconsin]"). Where an 
author's SiteName is general or nonspecific, the author's name and the year of 
publication, in square brackets, will preface the SiteName (e.g. "[Mott & Camfield 
1969] Site 3").
SiteCode	Coded name for site, in 3 divisions: country, 2nd and 3rd political subdivisions, and 
site (e.g. "USA-MN053-WOLS").
SiteExists	Year that the site was last known to exist or not to exist (e.g. "Y1985" or "N1977").
PolDiv1	Code for the first political subdivision - country.
PolDiv2	Code for the second political subdivision (USA = state). The value "00" will be 
entered where the second political subdivision is unspecified or unknown.
PolDiv3	Code for the third political subdivision (USA = county). The value "000" will be 
entered where the third political subdivision is unspecified or unknown.
Latitude	Stored in pseudodecimal format (ddd.mmss). Negative values indicate latitudes south of 
the equator. Digits to the right of the seconds represent decimal fractions of seconds. 
(Examples: 44 22'11" is stored as 44.2211; -37 50' is stored as -37.5; 40 20'10" is 
stored as 40.201; 6 31'15.5" is stored as 6.31155).
Longitude	Stored in pseudodecimal format (ddd.mmss). Negative values indicate longitudes west 
of the Greenwich meridian. Digits to the right of the seconds represent decimal 
fractions of seconds. (Examples: -100 50'25" is stored as -100.5025; 32 00'10" is 
stored as 32.001; 10 5'2.5" is stored as 10.05025).
UTM	Universal Transverse Mercator designation for the site (e.g. "18RTE36653775").
Elevation	Elevation (altitude) of the site in meters above sea level.
AreaOfSite	Approximate area of the present site in hectares (i.e. the open area of a lake).


TABLE SITEDESC	Site descriptions.

The SITEDESC table is an Archival table that stores textual descriptions of a site. This table is a 
subtype of table SITELOC. 

	FIELDS	(	Site#	S
			SiteDescript	A40
			Physiography	A40
			SurroundVeg	A40
			VegFormation	A40
			IGCPtype	A8 )
	PRIMARY KEY 	(	Site# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Site# ) references SITELOC.
		(	IGCPtype ) references IGCPTYPE.

Site#	Identifier for the site.
SiteDescript	Brief description of the present nature of the site (e.g. "lake with marginal fen").
Physiography	Physiographic description (e.g. "rolling stagnation moraine").
SurroundVeg	Vegetation surrounding the coring site.
VegFormation	Vegetation formation (e.g. "boreal forest"). The vegetation formation in Europe is 
defined as the unit depicted on the Map of the Natural Vegetation of the member 
countries of the European Community and the Council of Europe (1987). If a site is not 
located within one of these countries then an appropriate vegetation formation is 
assigned (e.g. "Quercus/Fraxinus woods").
IGCPtype	IGCP type region code (e.g. "F-x", for the Forez, Velay and Aubrac region).


TABLE SITEINFO	Sites and associated published information.

The SITEINFO table is an Archival table that stores information that cross-references sites and the 
published information on them. 

	FIELDS	(	Site#	S
			ICode	A3
			Publ#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Site#, ICode, Publ# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Site# ) references SITELOC.
		(	ICode ) references INFOTYPE.
		(	Publ# ) references PUBL.

Site#	Identifier for the site.
ICode	Three character identifier for the type of information present in the publication (e.g. 
ALG=algae, COL=coleopterans, POL=pollen). These identifiers and their 
descriptions are stored in table INFOTYPE.
Publ#	Identifier for the publication.




TABLE ENTITY	Entity identification and description.

The ENTITY table is an Archival table that stores the description of an entity. An entity is either a 
core, a section, or a surface sample that is associated with exactly one site. The entity is the unit of 
organization of the database.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Site#	S
			Sigle	A8
			Name	A30
			IsCore	A1
			IsSect	A1
			IsSSamp	A1
			Descriptor	A4
			HasAnLam	A1
			EntLoc	A40
			LocalVeg	A40
			Coll#	S
			SampDate	A10
			DepthAtLoc	N
			IceThickCM	S
			SampDevice	A30
			CoreDiamCM	N
			C14DepthAdj	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E# )
	ALTERNATE KEY	(	Sigle )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Site# ) references SITELOC.
		(	Descriptor ) references DESCR.
		(	Coll# ) references WORKERS.

E#	Unique identifier for the base data entity (core, section, etc.).
Site#	Identifier for the site.
Sigle	Unique code name for the entity. The Sigle is any unique combination of uppercase 
letters, numbers, and certain special characters. These special characters include those 
that are legal DOS filename characters.
Name	Any modifier of the site name as published on the pollen diagram (e.g. "core B" or 
"boring 16A"). For NAPD, where none is given, Name is left blank (null). An entity is 
a core, which may include a series of segments, a section, or a surface sample, or any 
combination thereof.
IsCore	"Y" if the entity is a core, otherwise "N".
IsSect	"Y" if the entity is a section, otherwise "N".
IsSSamp	"Y" if the entity is a modern surface sample, otherwise "N".
Descriptor	Identifier for the description of modern entity site. These identifiers and their 
descriptions are listed in table DESCR.
HasAnLam	Code describing the type of analyzed annual laminations: T=annually laminated to top, 
P=laminated, but not to top, N=no laminations or laminations not analyzed. The term 
'varve' is reserved for varves sensu stricto (i.e. glacial varves). [Applies to Cores and 
Sections only.]
EntLoc	Location where the sample or core was taken (e.g. "north side of lake").
LocalVeg	Local vegetation at the collection site.
Coll#	Identifier of the worker who took the core or collected the surface sample.
SampDate	Date that the sample or core was collected. Enter date as yyyy-mm-dd (e.g. "1977-08-
25", or where the day is not reported, "1962-01-00", or if no date, "0000-00-00").
DepthAtLoc	Water depth at the coring location (cm). [Applies to Cores and Surface Samples only.]
IceThickCM	Thickness of the ice through which a sample was taken (cm).
SampDevice	Name of the sampling or coring device (e.g. "Livingstone piston sampler").
CoreDiamCM	Diameter of the core (cm). [Applies to cores only.]
C14DepthAdj	Adjustment for C14 depths needed to relate the depth of the dated samples to the pollen 
or other samples. This is necessary since depths cited for samples taken for radiocarbon 
and other geochronological dates may have been measured from a different datum than 
those for pollen and other samples (cm). (See also, table GEOCHRON.) [Applies to 
Cores and Sections only.] 


TABLE P_ENTITY	Pollen-specific entity data.

The P_ENTITY and M_ENTITY tables are Archival tables that store additional information about the 
entity including the source and form of the data, and its use status. These tables are subtypes of table 
ENTITY.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Contact#	S
			DataSource	A80
			DataForm	A2
			UseStatus	A1 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.
		(	Contact# ) references WORKERS.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Contact#	Identifier for the worker responsible for the data, the contact person.
DataSource	Source of the data (e.g. "publication", "originator", "COHMAP").
DataForm	Two character code indicating the form of the data. It must be one of the following: 
RC=raw counts, RP=raw percentages, DC=digitized counts, DP=digitized 
percentages. The EPD protocols require that all data be of form RC.
UseStatus	One character code indicating the use status of the data. It must be one of the 
following: USA: P=published, U=unpublished; EUR: F=free, R=restricted. The 
EPD will distribute all data, restricted and unrestricted. Restricted data can be viewed 
by the user, but can only be used with the permission of the originator.


TABLE M_ENTITY	Macrofossil-specific entity data.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Contact#	S
			DataSource	A80
			UseStatus	A1 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.
		(	Contact# ) references WORKERS.



E#	Identifier for the entity.
Contact#	Identifier for the worker responsible for the data, the contact person.
DataSource	Source of the data (e.g. "publication", "originator", "COHMAP").
UseStatus	One character code indicating the use status of the data. It must be one of the 
following: USA: P=published, U=unpublished; EUR: F=free, R=restricted.


TABLE COREDRIV	Core drive identification and description.

The COREDRIV table is an Archival table that stores information on core-drives.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Drive#	S
			DriveLabel	A10
			DriveTopCM	N
			DriveBotCM	N
			InfTopCM	N
			InfBotCM	N
			RecoveryCM	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Drive# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Drive#	Unique identifier for the drive.
DriveLabel	Label given to the drive (e.g. "4B")
DriveTopCM	Depth at which the drive for the core segment started (cm).
DriveBotCM	Depth at which the drive  for the core segment stopped or bottomed (cm).
InfTopCM	Inferred depth of the top of the core segment, according to the data originator, when 
account has been made for any compaction or sediment disturbance (cm).
InfBotCM	Inferred depth of the bottom of the core segment (cm).
RecoveryCM	Length of the segment recovered (cm).


TABLE SECTION	Section identification and description.

The SECTION table is an Archival table that stores information related to the identification of the 
sections taken for an entity.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Section#	S
			SectionLabel	A60
			SectionTopCM	N
			SectionBotCM	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Section# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Section#	Unique identifier for the section.
SectionLabel	Label given to the section.
SectionTopCM	Depth of the top of the section relative to datum (cm).
SectionBotCM	Depth of the bottom of the section relative to datum (cm).


TABLE ENTITY&&	Notes on entity.

The ENTITY&& table is an Archival table that stores notes on an entity. Notes on an entity are stored 
as any number of 60 character lines of text.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Line#	S
			Text	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Line# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Line#	Unique identifier for the line.
Text	Notes on the description of the entity (notes are any number of 60 character lines of 
text).


TABLE GEOCHRON	Analytically determined dates.

The GEOCHRON table is an Archival table that stores geochronological information that is common 
to all of the different types of geochronological dates (e.g. radiocarbon or fission track dates). This 
common information includes depth, material dated, and a reference to the published description of the 
event. The GEOCHRON table is the super-type to tables that store information for a particular 
geochronological dating method (e.g. tables C14 and FT).

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			Method	A1
			DepthCM	N
			Thickness	N
			MaterialDated	A30
			Publ#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.
		(	Publ# ) references PUBL.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Unique identifier for the dated sample.
Method	A one character code indicating the method used to date the material. It must be one of 
the following: A=AAR, C=14C, E=ESR, F=FT, K=KAR, P=210Pb, T=TL, 
U=USERIES.
DepthCM	Reported depth of the midpoint of the sample (cm). Subtract the value of 
C14DepthAdj (table ENTITY) from the reported depth to correlate 
geochronological with fossil depths.
Thickness	Thickness of the sample (cm).
MaterialDated	Type of material and fraction dated. This should be defined as precisely as possible 
(e.g. "gyttja", "wood (Pinus sylvestris)", "shell (Arctica islandica)").
Publ#	Bibliographic citation for the dating information for this sample.


TABLE AAR	Amino Acid Racemization dating information.

The AAR table is an Archival table that stores Amino Acid Racemization dating information. This table 
is a subtype of table GEOCHRON.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			AgeBP	N
			ErrorLimits	N
			TaxonDated	A30
			LabNumber	A10 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Sample# ) references GEOCHRON.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Identifier for the dated sample.
AgeBP	Age determination of the sample in years BP.
ErrorLimits	Error (ñ) in the reported age.
TaxonDated	Taxonomic classification of the dated material (e.g. Arctica islandica).
LabNumber	Laboratory number assigned to the sample.


TABLE C14	Carbon-14 dating information.

The C14 table is an Archival table that stores Radiocarbon dating information. This table is a subtype 
of table GEOCHRON.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			AgeBP	N
			AgeSDUp	N
			AgeSDLo	N
			GrThanAge	A1
			Basis	A1
			Enriched	A1
			LabNumber	A10
			DeltaC13	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	ALTERNATE KEY	(	LabNumber )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Sample# ) references GEOCHRON.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Identifier for the dated sample.
AgeBP	Age determination of the sample in years BP (= 1950 using the Libby half-life).
AgeSDUp	Upper standard deviation of this age.
AgeSDLo	Lower standard deviation of this age.
GrThanAge	"Y" if the determination is stated as being 'greater than', otherwise "N" (the default).
Basis	A one character code indicating the method used to make the radiocarbon 
determination. It must be one of the following: A=accelerator, G=gas decay count, 
L=decay count liquid scintillation, U=decay count method unknown.
Enriched	"Y" if the sample was enriched, otherwise "N".


LabNumber	Laboratory number assigned to the sample (e.g. "St-1050").
DeltaC13	Value of delta Carbon-13.


TABLE ESR	Electron Spin Resonance dating information.

The ESR table is an Archival table that stores Electron Spin Resonance dating information. This table 
is a subtype of table GEOCHRON.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			AgeBP	N
			ErrorLimits	N
			LabNumber	A10 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Sample# ) references GEOCHRON.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Identifier for the dated sample.
AgeBP	Age determination of the sample in years BP.
ErrorLimits	Error (ñ) in the age determination.
LabNumber	Laboratory number assigned to the sample.


TABLE FT	Fission Track dating information.

The FT table is an Archival table that stores Fission Track dating information. This table is a subtype 
of table GEOCHRON.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			AgeBP	N
			ErrorLimits	N
			LabNumber	A10 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Sample# ) references GEOCHRON.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Identifier for the dated sample.
AgeBP	Age determination of the sample in years BP.
ErrorLimits	Error (ñ) in the age determination.
LabNumber	Laboratory number assigned to the sample.




TABLE KAR	Potassium/Argon dating information.

The KAR table is an Archival table that stores Potassium/Argon dating information. This table is a 
subtype of table GEOCHRON.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			AgeBP	N
			ErrorLimits	N
			LabNumber	A10 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Sample# ) references GEOCHRON.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Identifier for the dated sample.
AgeBP	Age determination of the sample in years BP.
ErrorLimits	Error (ñ) in the age determination.
LabNumber	Laboratory number assigned to the sample.


TABLE PB210	Lead-210 dating information.

The PB210 table is an Archival table that stores 210Pb dating information. This table is a subtype of 
table GEOCHRON.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			AgeAD	N
			AgeSDUp	N
			AgeSDLo	N
			GrThanAge	A1 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Sample# ) references GEOCHRON.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Identifier for the dated sample.
AgeAD	Age determination of the sample in years AD.
AgeSDUp	Upper standard deviation of the age determination.
AgeSDLo	Lower standard deviation of the age determination.
GrThanAge	"Y" if the determination is stated as being 'greater than', otherwise "N" (the default).




TABLE TL	Thermoluminescence dating information.

The TL table is an Archival table that stores Thermoluminescence dating information. This table is a 
subtype of table GEOCHRON.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			AgeBP	N
			ErrorLimits	N
			GrainSize	A10
			LabNumber	A10 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Sample# ) references GEOCHRON.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Identifier for the dated sample.
AgeBP	Age determination of the sample in years BP.
ErrorLimits	Error (ñ) in the age determination.
GrainSize	Range of grain size of the dated sediments in microns (e.g. "2-10").
LabNumber	Laboratory number assigned to the sample.


TABLE USERIES	Uranium-series dating information.

The USERIES table is an Archival table that stores Uranium-series dating information. This table is a 
subtype of table GEOCHRON.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			AgeBP	N
			ErrorLimits	N
			LabNumber	A10 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Sample# ) references GEOCHRON.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Identifier for the dated sample.
AgeBP	Age determination of the sample in years BP.
ErrorLimits	Error (ñ) in the age determination.
LabNumber	Laboratory number assigned to the sample.




TABLE SYNEVENT	Dates from synchronous events.

The SYNEVENT table is an Archival table that stores information on ages associated with an entity 
based on evidence from synchronous events. The description of the event is stored in the EVENT 
table.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Event#	S
			DepthCM	N
			Thickness	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Event# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.
		(	Event# ) references EVENT.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Event#	Identifier for the event (event names are stored in table EVENT).
DepthCM	Depth of the midpoint of the event (cm).
Thickness	Thickness of the event (cm).


TABLE EVENT	Event names and dates.

The EVENT table is an Archival look-up table that stores the description of an event. The description 
includes its name, age, the uncertainty in the age, and a reference to the published description of the 
event.

	FIELDS	(	Event#	S
			Event	A1
			Name	A30
			AgeBP	N
			AgeUncertUp	N
			AgeUncertLo	N
			Publ#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Event# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Publ# ) references PUBL.

Event#	Unique identifier for the event.
Event	One character code for the type of the event that is being used to date or correlate the 
core: T=tephra, C=137Cs, ...
Name	Name of the event (e.g. "China Hat" for a tephra; "Vedde ash bed").
AgeBP	Estimated age of the event in 14C years BP.
AgeUncertUp	Upper bound of range of uncertainty in the age of the event.
AgeUncertLo	Lower bound of range of uncertainty in the age of the event.
Publ#	Bibliographic citation for the age of the event.




TABLE ALSEGS	Annual laminations segments description.

The ALSEGS table is an Archival table that stores information on annual lamination segments. A 
segment is defined as a continuous stratigraphic sequence of annual laminations. An entity can have any 
number of segments. Depths and counts are stored in the P_ANLDPT or M_ANLDPT tables.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Seg#	S
			DepthTopCM	N
			DepthBotCM	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Seg# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Seg#	Unique identifier for the segment.
DepthTopCM	Depth of the top of the annually laminated segment (cm).
DepthBotCM	Depth of the bottom of the segment (cm).


TABLE P_ANLDPT	Pollen annual laminations depths information.

The P_ANLDPT and M_ANLDPT tables are Archival tables that store information on annual 
laminations for each of an entity's segments (segment descriptions are stored in table ALSEGS). These 
tables store the lamination counts and depths of samples within a segment.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Seg#	S
			Sample#	S
			DepthCM	N
			Thickness	N
			CountTop	N
			CountBot	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Seg#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Seg# ) references ALSEGS.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Seg#	Identifier for the annual lamination segment.
Sample#	Unique identifier for the sample.
DepthCM	Depth of the midpoint of the sample (cm).
Thickness	Thickness of the sample (cm).
CountTop	Annual laminations count at the top of the sample.
CountBot	Annual laminations count at the bottom of the sample.




TABLE M_ANLDPT	Macrofossil annual laminations depths information.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Seg#	S
			Sample#	S
			DepthCM	N
			Thickness	N
			CountTop	N
			CountBot	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Seg#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Seg# ) references ALSEGS.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Seg#	Identifier for the annual lamination segment.
Sample#	Unique identifier for the sample.
DepthCM	Depth of midpoint of the sample (cm).
Thickness	Thickness of the sample (cm).
CountTop	Annual laminations count at the top of the sample.
CountBot	Annual laminations count at the bottom of the sample.


TABLE DATING&&	Notes on dating.

The DATING&& table is an Archival table that stores notes on dating, including both 
geochronological and synchronous event dates. Notes for an entity are stored as any number of 60 
character lines of text.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Line#	S
			Text	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Line# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Line#	Unique identifier for the line.
Text	Additional notes on dating (notes are any number of 60 character lines of text).


TABLE P_PREP&&	Notes on pollen sample preparation.

The P_PREP&& and M_PREP&& tables are Archival tables that store notes on sample preparation, 
including sample treatments and exceptions. Notes for an entity are stored as any number of 60 
character lines of text.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Line#	S
			Text	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Line# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Line#	Unique identifier for the line.
Text	Additional notes on pollen sample preparation (notes are any number of 60 character 
lines of text).


TABLE M_PREP&&	Notes on macrofossil sample preparation.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Line#	S
			Text	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Line# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Line#	Unique identifier for the line.
Text	Additional notes on macrofossil sample preparation (notes are any number of 60 
character lines of text).


TABLE P_VARS	Look-up table for pollen variable names.

The P_VARS and M_VARS tables are Archival tables that store the names, codes and hierarchy 
information for each pollen variable recognized by the Pollen Database, including synonyms. 

	FIELDS	(	Var#	S
			AccVar#	S
			SynType	A1
			VarCode	A8
			VarName	A60
			HVar#	S
			Auth#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Var# )
	ALTERNATE KEY	(	VarCode )
		(	VarName )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	AccVar# ) references P_VARS.
		(	HVar# ) references P_VARS.
		(	Auth# ) references PUBL.

Var#	Unique identifier for the variable.
AccVar#	Identifier of the accepted Var# for this variable. AccVar# = Var# where VarName is 
the senior synonym.
SynType	One-character code indicating the type of synonym. It must be one of the following: 
M=morphological; N=nomenclatural; 1=name of a globally-monospecific genus (e.g. 
Zea); 2=name of a genus that is monospecific within a continent, but not globally (e.g. 
Tilia americana in North America); or <null> for accepted variables.
VarCode	Eight character code for the pollen variable name.
VarName	Name of the pollen type or variable, including Linnean and non-Linnean names (Acer 
saccharum-type, Cerealea, Avena/Triticum), or non-pollen (microspheres).
HVar#	Var# of the next higher taxon of which the pollen type is a member. (Special cases: if 
HVar# = Var#, then name is valid and it is the highest taxon recognized. HVar# is 
null for non-accepted variables.)


Auth#	Identifier for the publication cited as authority for a pollen variable name. For NAPD 
this will be the authority for the Latin portion of the pollen variable's name (e.g. 
Gleason and Cronquist 1991 is the authority for Dalea purpurea in 
Dalea purpurea-type).


TABLE M_VARS	Look-up table for macrofossil variable names.

	FIELDS	(	Var#	S
			AccVar#	S
			SynType	A1
			VarCode	A8
			VarName	A60
			HVar#	S
			Auth#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Var# )
	ALTERNATE KEY	(	VarCode )
		(	VarName )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	AccVar# ) references P_VARS.
		(	HVar# ) references P_VARS.
		(	Auth# ) references PUBL.

Var#	Unique identifier for the variable.
AccVar#	Identifier of the accepted Var# for this variable. AccVar# = Var# where VarName is 
the senior synonym.
SynType	One-character code indicating the type of synonym. It must be one of the following: 
M=morphological; N=nomenclatural; 1=name of a globally-monospecific genus (e.g. 
Zea); 2=name of a genus that is monospecific within a continent, but not globally (e.g. 
Tilia americana in North America); or <null> for accepted variables.
VarCode	Eight character code for the macrofossil variable named.
VarName	Name of the pollen type or variable, including Linnean and non-Linnean names (Acer 
saccharum-type, Cerealea, Avena/Triticum), or non-pollen (microspheres).
HVar#	Var# of the next higher taxon of which the pollen type is a member. (Special cases: if 
HVar# = Var#, then name is valid and it is the highest taxon recognized. HVar# is 
null for non-accepted variables.)
Auth#	Identifier for the publication cited as authority for a macrofossil variable name.


TABLE P_SAMPLE	Pollen sample depths and thicknesses.

The P_SAMPLE and M_SAMPLE tables are Archival tables that store the sample depths for an 
entity. This table also stores an identifier for the worker who analyzed the sample.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			DepthCM	N
			Thickness	N
			Analyst#	S
			AnalyDate	A10 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.
		(	Analyst# ) references WORKERS.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Unique identifier for the sample.
DepthCM	Depth of the midpoint of the sample (cm).
Thickness	Thickness of the sample (cm).
Analyst#	Identifier of the worker who counted the pollen sample.
AnalyDate	Date that the pollen analysis was completed. Enter date as yyyy-mm-dd (e.g. "1977-08-
25", or where the day is not reported, "1962-01-00", or if no date, "0000-00-00").


TABLE M_SAMPLE	Macrofossil sample depths and thicknesses.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			DepthCM	N
			Thickness	N
			Analyst#	S
			AnalyDate	A10 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.
		(	Analyst# ) references WORKERS.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Unique identifier for the sample.
DepthCM	Depth of the midpoint of the sample (cm).
Thickness	Thickness of the sample (cm).
Analyst#	Identifier of the worker who counted the macrofossil sample.
AnalyDate	Date that the macrofossil analysis was completed. Enter date as yyyy-mm-dd (e.g. 
"1977-08-25", or where the day is not reported, "1962-01-00", or if no date, "0000-00-
00").


TABLE P_COUNTS	Pollen counts.

The P_COUNTS and M_COUNTS tables are Archival tables that store the pollen counts for an entity. 
This table stores the non-zero counts for each combination of variable and sample depth (the depths 
values are stored in table P_SAMPLE).

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			Var#	S
			Count	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample#, Var# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Sample# ) references P_SAMPLE.
		(	Var# ) references P_VARS.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Identifier for the sample.
Var#	Identifier for the variable.
Count	Pollen count. It must be a positive number.


TABLE M_COUNTS	Macrofossil counts.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			Var#	S
			Count	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample#, Var# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Sample# ) references M_SAMPLE.
		(	Var# ) references M_VARS.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Identifier for the sample.
Var#	Identifier for the variable.
Count	Macrofossil count. It must be a positive number.


TABLE LITHOLGY	Sediment lithology.

The LITHOLGY table is an Archival table that stores sediment lithology information for an entity.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Lith#	S
			Descript	A40
			DepthTopCM	N
			DepthBotCM	N
			LoBoundary	A40 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Lith# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Lith#	Unique identifier for the lithological unit.
Descript	Description of the lithological unit.
DepthTopCM	Depth of the top of the lithological unit (cm).
DepthBotCM	Depth of the bottom of the lithological unit (cm).
LoBoundary	Description of the nature of the lower boundary.


TABLE LOI	Loss-on-ignition information.

The LOI table is an Archival table that stores Loss-on-ignition information for an entity.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Sample#	S
			DepthCM	N
			Thickness	N
			TempLo	S
			LOILo	N
			TempHi	S
			LOIHi	N
			BulkDens	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Sample#	Unique identifier for the sample.
DepthCM	Depth of the midpoint of the sample (cm).
Thickness	Thickness of the sample (cm).
TempLo	Low loss-on-ignition temperature in  C (e.g. 500).
LOILo	Loss-on-ignition value, low temperature (organics), as a percentage of dry mass.
TempHi	High loss-on-ignition temperature in  C (e.g. 1000).
LOIHi	Loss-on-ignition value (carbonates), as a percentage of dry mass.
BulkDens	Dry mass of the sample in g/cm3.


TABLE PUBL	Publications and their library accession numbers.

The PUBL table is an Archival table that stores publication and library accession numbers.

	FIELDS	(	Publ#	S
			Acc#	S
			YearOfPubl	A4 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Publ# )
	ALTERNATE KEY	(	Acc# )

Publ#	Unique identifier for the publication.
Acc#	A local library accession number (these are assigned as consecutive short integers). The 
absence of a value implies no local reprint of the publication.
YearOfPubl	Year of publication.


TABLE PUBLCIT	Full bibliographic citations (in Ecology style).

The PUBLCIT table is an Archival table that stores the complete bibliographic citation for a 
publication, in the style of the journal Ecology. Citations are stored as any number of 60 character lines 
of text.

	FIELDS	(	Publ#	S
			Line#	S
			Text	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Publ#, Line# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Publ# ) references PUBL.

Publ#	Identifier for the publication.
Line#	Unique identifier for the line.
Text	Sixty characters for each line of the bibliographic citation, using formatting conventions 
of the journal Ecology and The CBE Style Manual. Since Paradox 3.5 does not support 
text formatting such as italics and boldface in fields, the following additional 
conventions will be used: text between extended ASCII characters 174 and 175 
(decimal) is understood to indicate italics; text between extended ASCII characters 169 
and 170 is understood to indicate boldface.




TABLE PUBLENT	Publications cross-referenced by entity.

The PUBLENT table is an Archival table that cross-references publications and the entities on which 
they report. This table may be used to find the entities associated with any publication, or the 
publications associated with any entity.

	FIELDS	(	Publ#	S
			E#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Publ#, E# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Publ# ) references PUBL.
		(	E# ) references ENTITY.

Publ#	Identifier for the publication.
E#	Identifier for the entity.

TABLE AUTHORS	Publications cross-referenced by authors.

The AUTHORS table is an Archival table that cross-references authors to their publications. This table 
may be used to find the publications authored by a worker.

	FIELDS	(	Author#	S
			Publ#	S
			Order	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Author#, Publ# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Author# ) references WORKERS.
		(	Publ# ) references PUBL.

Author#	Identifier for the name of the author.
Publ#	Identifier for the publication.
Order	An integer that identifies the ordering of authorship (1,2,3,...,n) in a publication.




8.2. Lookup and Referral Tables

TABLE POLDIV1	Look-up table of country names.

The POLDIV1 table is a Look-up table of 1st political subdivision names. These correspond to the 
names of countries.

	FIELDS	(	PolDiv1	A3
			Name	A40 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	PolDiv1 )
	ALTERNATE KEY	(	Name )

PolDiv1	ISO/ANSI three-letter country codes (source: U.S. Department of Commerce FIPS 
PUB 104-1). Note that GER will be used for the unified Germany until an ISO standard 
code is announced.
Name	Name of the country (spellings used are those specified by the ISO 3166 standard).


TABLE POLDIV2	Look-up table of 2nd political subdivision names.

The POLDIV2 table is a Look-up table of 2nd political subdivision names. The 2nd political division in 
the United States is the state, it is the province or territory in Canada.

	FIELDS	(	PolDiv1	A3
			PolDiv2	A2
			PostCode	A2
			Name	A25 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	PolDiv1, PolDiv2 )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	PolDiv1 ) references POLDIV1.

PolDiv1	Three letter country codes.
PolDiv2	Two digit codes for 2nd political subdivision. In North America these are states or 
provinces (source: U.S. Department of Commerce FIPS PUB 10-3). In Europe a list is 
currently being compiled of all the major political subdivisions of countries (i.e. Vice 
Counties in the U.K., d‚partments in France, etc.). A map will eventually be prepared 
that will depict the boundaries between each of these areas.
PostCode	Two letter postal code.
Name	Name of the political subdivision. 


TABLE POLDIV3	Look-up table of 3rd political subdivision names.

The POLDIV3 table is a Look-up table of 3rd political subdivisions names. These correspond, 
generally, to county names in the United States.

	FIELDS	(	PolDiv1	A3
			PolDiv2	A2
			PolDiv3	A3
			Name	A40 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	PolDiv1, PolDiv2, PolDiv3 )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	PolDiv1, PolDiv2 ) references POLDIV2.

PolDiv1	Three letter country codes.
PolDiv2	Two digit 2nd political subdivision code.
PolDiv3	Three digit codes for 3rd political subdivision. In North America these are counties or 
census divisions (source: U.S. Department of Commerce FIPS PUB 6-4 and Statistics 
Canada, Geography Division, Geography Attributes File 1986). In Europe, the minor 
political subdivisions (parishes, townships, etc.) are so numerous that they are only 
being entered into the database as necessary. 
Name	Name of the political subdivision.


TABLE INFOTYPE	Look-up table for information type names.

The INFOTYPE table is a Look-up table that stores the full names for the three character information 
type codes.

	FIELDS	(	ICode	A3
			InfoType	A30 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	ICode )

ICode	Unique three character identifier for the information type.
InfoType	Name for the type of information (e.g. "algae", "dendrochronology").

ICode	InfoType
-------	------------------------
AAR	amino acid racemization
ALG	algae
ARC	archaeology
C14	radiocarbon
CES	cesium-134, cesium-137
CHA	charcoal
CHI	chironomids
CLA	cladocerans
COL	coleopterans
DEN	dendrochronology
DIA	diatoms
ESR	electron spin resonance
FIS	fission track
FOR	foraminiferans
GEO	geochemistry
GRA	granulometry
INS	other insects
ISO	other stable isotopes
KAR	potassium/argon
LED	lead-210
LOI	loss on ignition
LUM	thermoluminescence
MAC	macrofossils
MAG	palaeomagnetism
MOL	molluscs
OST	ostracods
OTH	other
OXY	stable oxygen isotopes
POL	pollen
RAD	radon-226
RHI	rhizopods
TEF	tephra
URA	u-series

TABLE DESCR	Look-up table for entity site-descriptions.

The DESCR table is a Look-up table that stores the descriptions associated with each of the four 
character descriptor codes.

	FIELDS	(	Descriptor	A4
			HigherDescr	A4
			Description	A40 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Descriptor )

Descriptor	Unique four character identifier for the entity site-descriptions.
HigherDescr	Identifier of the next higher descriptor in the hierarchy. HigherDescr=Descriptor at the 
top level of the hierarchy.
Description	Description of the modern entity site (e.g. "lacustrine", "mire").

Descr	Description (indentation indicates hierarchy)
--------	-----------------------------------------------------
AERI	aerial
AAIR		air pollen sampler
ARCH	archaeological
COAS	coastal
CEST		estuarine
FLUV	fluvial
LACU	lacustrine
LART		artificial open-water
LOTH			other (e.g. Norfolk Broads)
LRES			reservoir
LSTK			stock pond
LDRA		drained lake
LNAT		natural open water
LFLU			fluvial origin (e.g. oxbow lake)
LGLA			glacial origin
LPER			periglacial origin
LSOL			solution hollow
LUNK			origin unknown
LPRO		pro-glacial lake
LPLY		playa
LTRA		pollen trap (e.g. Tauber trap in or on a lake)
MARI	marine
OTHR	other
TERR	terrestrial
TCAV		cave sediment
TLUS		loess
TMIR		mire (= peatland, > 30cm peat)
TBOG			bog
TBLA				blanket bog
TRAI				raised bog
TFEN			fen
TVAL				valley mire
TSOL				soligenous (mineraltrophic) mire
TOWT				open-water transition mire
TFLO				floating mire
TFLP				flood plain mire
TSWA			swamp (= forested peatland = forested wetland)
TMOS		moss polster
TMSH		marsh
TSOI		soil
TMOR			mor humus
TTRA		pollen trap (e.g. Tauber trap on terrestrial surface)


TABLE RATIONAL	Look-up table for dating rationales.

The RATIONAL table is a Look-up table that stores the descriptions of the dating rationales (e.g. 
Tsuga decline) associated with each 3 character rationale code.

	FIELDS	(	RCode	A3
			Rationale	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	RCode )

RCode	Unique three character identifier for the dating rationale.
Rationale	Description of the rationale for the date assignment.

RCode	Rationale
--------	------------------------------------
AMR	Ambrosia rise
ANL	annual laminations
BOT	bottom of core
C13	corrected for isotopic fractionation with C13
C14	uncorrected radiocarbon date
CAJ	adjusted for ancient carbon
CAV	averaged radiocarbon date
CCA	calibrated radiocarbon date
CGT	radiocarbon greater than date
COM	corrected for compaction
DEN	C14 date with dendrochronological correction
ESH	European settlement horizon
GUE	guess
INT	interpolated date
OTH	other
POL	pollen stratigraphic date
SED	sediment stratigraphic date
TEF	tephra date
TOP	top of core
TSD	Tsuga decline


TABLE IGCPTYPE	Look-up table for IGCP type region codes.

The IGCPTYPE table is a Look-up table that stores the names and codes for the IGCP type regions. 
The IGCP catalogue includes a series of maps that indicate the type region boundaries, and a set of 
codes that uniquely identify each region.

	FIELDS	(	IGCPtype	A8
			RegionName	A80 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	IGCPtype )

IGCPtype	IGCP type region code.
RegionName	Name of the IGCP type region.




8.3. Research Tables

TABLE P_GROUP	Major group to which a pollen variable is assigned.

Tables P_GROUP and M_GROUP are Research tables that store the group to which each pollen 
variable is assigned. These tables enable the user to define taxa into groups based on the life form and 
habitat of each taxon (e.g. trees, aquatics). The organisation of these tables allows for multiple sets of 
groupings.

	FIELDS	(	Set#	S
			Var#	S
			GroupId	A4 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Set#, Var# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Var# ) references P_VARS.
		(	GroupId ) references GROUPS.

Set#	Unique identifier for the group set.	
Var#	Identifier for the pollen variable.
GroupId	Four-character identifier of the major group to which the pollen variable belongs (e.g. 
"AQUA" for aquatics).


TABLE M_GROUP	Major group to which a macrofossil variable is assigned.

	FIELDS	(	Set#	S
			Var#	S
			GroupId	A4 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Set#, Var# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Var# ) references M_VARS.
		(	GroupId ) references GROUPS.

Set#	Unique identifier for the group set.	
Var#	Identifier for the macrofossil variable.
GroupId	Four-character identifier of the major group to which the macrofossil variable belongs.


TABLE GROUPS	Names for major groups.

The GROUPS table is a Research table that acts as a look-up table for the names and codes for 
variable groups.

	FIELDS	(	GroupId	A4
			GroupCode	A1
			GroupName	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	GroupId )
	ALTERNATE KEY	(	GroupCode )

GroupId	Unique four-character identifier for the major group (e.g. "UPHE" for upland herbs).
GroupCode	One character code for the major group.
GroupName	Name of the major group (e.g. "trees", "aquatics", "nonpollen").


TABLE CHRON	Registers the chronologies developed for each entity.

The CHRON table is a Research table that registers each chronology developed for an entity. This 
table also stores the name of the model used to derive the sample ages, the name of the person who 
prepared the chronology, and the date the chronology was last modified.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Chron#	S
			Preferred	A1
			Name	A20
			PreparedBy	A30
			DatePrepared	A10
			Model	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Chron# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E# ) references ENTITY.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Chron#	Unique identifier for the developed chronology.
Preferred	"Y" if the chronology is designated the preferred chronology for that entity, otherwise 
"N".
Name	Name given to the chronology (e.g. "author's preferred").
PreparedBy	Name of the person who prepared the chronology.
DatePrepared	Date the chronology was prepared or last modified. Enter date as yyyy-mm-dd (e.g. 
"1977-08-25", or where the day is not reported, "1962-01-00", or if no date, "0000-00-
00").
Model	Name of the model used to derive the chronology (e.g. "cubic spline curve").


TABLE AGEBASIS	Dates used to establish age-depth.

The AGEBASIS table is a Research table that stores the data used to derive the age-depth curve for 
each chronology created for an entity (see table P_AGEDPT and M_AGEDPT).

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Chron#	S
			Sample#	S
			DepthCM	N
			Thickness	N
			Age	N
			AgeUp	N
			AgeLo	N
			RCode	A3 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Chron#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Chron# ) references CHRON.
		(	RCode ) references RATIONAL.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Chron#	Identifier for the chronology.
Sample#	Unique identifier for the dated sample.
DepthCM	Depth of the sample (cm).
Thickness	Thickness of the sample (cm).
Age	Estimated age of the sample.
AgeUp	Upper bound for the estimated age.
AgeLo	Lower bound for the estimated age.
RCode	Three character code for the description of the rationale for the age.


TABLE CHRON&&	Notes on age-depth construction, including model used.

The CHRON&& table is a Research table that stores notes on the derivation of the age-depth data 
(stored in tables P_AGEDPT and M_AGEDPT) for any of an entity's chronologies. The name of the 
age-model used should be recorded in this table. Notes for a given entity and chronology are stored as 
any number of 60 character lines of text.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Chron#	S
			Line#	S
			Text	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Chron#, Line# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Chron# ) references CHRON.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Chron#	Identifier for the chronology.
Line#	Unique identifier for the line.
Text	Additional notes on the chronology (notes are any number of 60 character lines of 
text).


TABLE P_AGEDPT	Pollen age-depths derived from age models.

The P_AGEDPT and M_AGEDPT tables are Research tables that store fitted age estimates for the 
sample depths for each chronology specified for an entity. Names for each chronology are stored in the 
CHRON table. The age-depth data are generated by applying the age-model to the data in the 
AGEBASIS table. 

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Chron#	S
			Sample#	S
			AgeBP	N
			AgeUp	N
			AgeLo	N
			DepTime	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Chron#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Chron# ) references CHRON.
		(	E#, Sample# ) references P_SAMPLE.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Chron#	Identifier for the chronology.
Sample#	Identifier for the depth of the sample.
AgeBP	Age of the sample in years BP.
AgeUp	Upper bound of the age.
AgeLo	Lower bound of the age.
DepTime	Deposition time (yr/cm).


TABLE M_AGEDPT	Macrofossil age-depths derived from age models.

	FIELDS	(	E#	S
			Chron#	S
			Sample#	S
			AgeBP	N
			AgeUp	N
			AgeLo	N
			DepTime	N )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	E#, Chron#, Sample# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	E#, Chron# ) references CHRON.
		(	E#, Sample# ) references P_SAMPLE.

E#	Identifier for the entity.
Chron#	Identifier for the chronology.
Sample#	Identifier for the depth of the sample.
AgeBP	Age of the sample in years BP.
AgeUp	Upper bound of the age.
AgeLo	Lower bound of the age.
DepTime	Deposition time (yr/cm).


TABLE P_VTRANS	Pollen variable name translation table.

The P_VTRANS and M_VTRANS tables are Research tables that store variable names in alternate or 
preferred style to that stored in P_VARS. This alternate style is then available for data output.

	FIELDS	(	Var#	S
			TranslatesTo	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Var# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Var# ) references P_VARS.

Var#	Identifier for the pollen variable.
TranslatesTo	Alternate or preferred name for this pollen variable (e.g. "Betula (arbustif)").


TABLE M_VTRANS	Macrofossil variable name translation table.

	FIELDS	(	Var#	S
			TranslatesTo	A60 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Var# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Var# ) references M_VARS.

Var#	Identifier for the macrofossil variable.
TranslatesTo	Alternate or preferred name for this macrofossil variable.




8.4. System Tables

TABLE SYSIDN	Database identification table.

The SYSIDN table is a System table that stores the identity of a database. There will be exactly one 
record in this table.

	FIELDS	(	Id	A10
			Name	A60
			Place	A60
			Type	A1 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Id )

Id	Unique identifier for the database. It can be up to 10 characters in length (e.g. "EPD").
Name	Full name of the database.
Place	Place where the database is located (e.g. "Montreal, Canada").
Type	Type of database. It must be either C=Central or R=Regional.


TABLE SYSCAT	Names of database tables.

The SYSCAT table stores the name and category of every table in the Pollen Database. Table 
categories are System, Base, and View. The Base tables are further divided into Archival, Lookup, and 
Research subcategories. The purpose of this table is to enable programs to access information on the 
structure or keys of a table given its name or its category.

	FIELDS	(	T#	S
			TableName	A8
			Category	A20 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	T# )
	ALTERNATE KEY	(	TableName )

T#	Unique identifier for the table (T#'s less than 100 are reserved for the system tables).
TableName	Name of the table.
Category	Category of the table. It must be one of the following: "system", "base-archival", 
"base-lookup", "base-research", or "view".


TABLE SYSCOL	Names and data types of database columns.

The SYSCOL table stores the name, data type, and domain type for each column (field) of each table 
in the Pollen Database. The column name is the name of the Paradox field, and data type is the 
Paradox data type (e.g. A20). Domain is not currently implemented.

	FIELDS	(	T#	S
			C#	S
			ColumnName	A20
			DataType	A4
			Domain	A20 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	T#, C# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	T# ) references SYSCAT.

T#	Identifier for the table.
C#	Unique identifier for the column.
ColumnName	Name of the column.
DataType	Type of data in the column (S=short integer, N=floating point number, 
An=alphanumeric, where 1 <= n <= 255).
Domain	Describes the range of valid values allowed in the  column.


TABLE SYSIDX	Identifies table columns that comprise primary, alternate, or foreign keys.

The SYSIDX table stores the keys that exist on each table in the Pollen Database. Key types that are 
recognized include, primary, alternate, and foreign. This table records each column comprising the 
key.

	FIELDS	(	KeyType	A1
			T#	S
			C#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	KeyType, T#, C# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	T#, C# ) references SYSCOL.

KeyType	Identifier for the type of the key (P=primary, A=alternate, F=foreign).
T#	Identifier for the table.
C#	Identifier for the column.


TABLE SYSFKS	Identifies foreign keys - their attributes and the tables they reference.

The SYSFKS table stores the columns comprising each foreign key in the Pollen Database and the 
table that is referenced by each foreign key. 

	FIELDS	(	FK#	S
			T#	S
			C#	S
			RefT#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	FK#, T#, C# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	T#, C# ) references SYSCOL.
		(	RefT# ) references SYSCAT.

FK#	Unique identifier for the foreign key.
T#	Identifier for the table.
C#	Identifier for the column.
RefT#	Identifier for the table referenced by the foreign key.




TABLE DBLOG	Data compilation history.

Table DBLOG stores a record of the compilation history of the database: when data or the database 
structure were modified, how, and by whom. 

	FIELDS	(	Date	D
			Action#	S
			Compiler	A2 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Date, Action# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Action# ) references DBACT.

Date	Date the compilation or modification was performed.
Action#	Identifier for the action performed.
Compiler	Initials of the data compiler.


TABLE DBACT	Data compilation history - actions taken.

The DBACT table stores a record of the actions performed on the database. 

	FIELDS	(	Action#	S
			Action	A255 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Action# )

Action#	Unique identifier for the action performed.
Action	Description of the action performed.


TABLE DBENT	Data compilation history - entities affected.

The DBENT table stores a record of the entities affected by a given action. 

	FIELDS	(	Date	D
			Action#	S
			E#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Date, Action# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Action# ) references DBACT.
		(	E# ) references ENTITY.

Date	Date the compilation or modification was performed.
Action#	Identifier for the action performed.
E#	Identifier for the entity affected.




8.5. Views

TABLE P_VARIS	View on P_VAR - pollen variable taxonomic hierarchy.

The P_VARIS and M_VARIS tables are Views that store the taxonomic hierarchy of variables in the 
Pollen Database. These views can be used to query at any level in the hierarchy (e.g. Juglans includes 
J. cinerea, J. nigra, and J. undiff.).

	FIELDS	(	Var#	S
			IsAlso#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Var#, IsAlso# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Var# ) references P_VARS.
		(	IsAlso# ) references P_VARS.

Var#	Identifier for the variable.
IsAlso#	Identifier for the variable that Var# is also one of (e.g. "Acer rubrum" is also an 
"Acer").


TABLE M_VARIS	View on M_VAR - macrofossil variable taxonomic hierarchy.

	FIELDS	(	Var#	S
			IsAlso#	S )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Var#, IsAlso# )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Var# ) references M_VARS.
		(	IsAlso# ) references M_VARS.

Var#	Identifier for the variable.
IsAlso#	Identifier for the variable that Var# is also one of.


TABLE DESCRIS	Description-Is-Also hierarchy: view on table DESCR.
The DESCRIS table is a Look-up table that stores the hierarchy of modern entity site-descriptors. This 
table can be used to query any level in the descriptor hierarchy (e.g. to query for bogs, or to query for 
mires, which include bogs, fens, and swamps).

	FIELDS	(	Descriptor	A4
			IsAlsoA	A4 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	Descriptor, IsAlsoA )
	FOREIGN KEY	(	Descriptor ) references DESCR.
		(	IsAlsoA ) references DESCR.

Descriptor	Identifier for the entity site-description.
IsAlsoA	Identifier that the Descriptor is also one of (e.g. a "fen" is also a "mire").




TABLE DATATYPS	Data types: view on tables SYSCAT and SYSCOL.

The DATATYPS table is a view based on tables SYSCAT and SYSCOL that contains the table name, 
column name, and data type for each column in the Pollen Database. This view is used by software to 
generate or check a data type, making software less susceptible to changes in Pollen Database structure.

	FIELDS	(	TblName	A8
			ColName	A20
			DataType	A4 )
	PRIMARY KEY	(	TblName, ColName )

TblName	Name of a Pollen Database table.
ColName	Name of a column in that table.
DataType	Data type of that column.

Pollen Database Manual

i


