


Connecting The Nation:
Classrooms, Libraries, and Health Care Organizations in the
Information Age 

Update 1995



Prepared by



NATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION

OFFICE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION APPLICATIONS





UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Ronald H. Brown, Secretary
Larry Irving, Assistant Secretary for
Communications and Information



Author
Emilio Gonzalez

Project Coordinator
Michael K. Hamra



June 1995



Acknowledgement



The author would like to extend special thanks to the following
NTIA staff for their expert advice and assistance in the
production of this report.  


Michele C. Farquhar, Chief of Staff
Bernadette McGuire-Rivera, Associate Administrator, OTIA
Helen Shaw, International Telecommunications Policy Director, OIA
James W. McConnaughey, Senior Economist, OPAD
Ellen M. Bloom, Director, Congressional Affairs
Barbara Wellbery, Chief Counsel
Kelly Levy, Senior Policy Analyst
Paige Darden, Telecommunications Information Specialist
Tim Robinson, Attorney Advisor, Office of the Chief Counsel Laura
Breeden, Director, Telecommunications and Information
Infrastructure Applications
James T. Vorhies, Communications Policy Specialist, OSM
Arthur Altenburg, Telecommunications Policy Analyst, OPCM
Don Druker, Telecommunications Policy Analyst, OTIA
Phyllis E. Hartsock, Deputy Chief Counsel, Office of the Chief
Counsel
Lisa Sockett, Attorney Advisor, Office of the Chief Counsel  
Kristan Van Hook, Telecommunications Policy Analyst, OPAD
Stephen J. Downs, Telecommunications Policy Analyst, OTIA
Lisa Leidig, Telecommunications Policy Analyst, OPAD
William Cooperman, Senior Communications Program Specialist, PTFP
Sandy Stewart, Administrative Assistant, OTIAExecutive Summary Connecting every classroom, library, hospital,
and clinic in the United States to the National Information
Infrastructure (NII) is a priority for the Clinton
Administration. It is critical for these public institutions to
become and remain active
participants in the NII, since they can use telecommunications
and information technologies to benefit all Americans. To this
end, the Clinton Administration is working actively with
Congress, the States, local governments, private industry, public
interest groups, and the public institutions themselves.

Connecting the Nation provides a status report on this critical
national initiative by drawing from the most current data
regarding Internet connectivity, a benchmark for NII access. This
report concludes that there is much work to be done before the
goal of connecting every classroom, library, and health care
organization to the NII is accomplished. Nevertheless, this
report highlights how Federal Government funding programs can
serve as a catalyst in this effort, spurring public-private
partnerships even in disadvantaged and remote areas of the
country.

Classrooms. As the transition to a knowledge-based economy
accelerates, America's children must have access to
communications and information technologies in the classroom.
Without these tools, American children will lack the necessary
computer skills to compete in the 21st Century. Deploying
computers in classrooms and connecting them to the NII will
enhance the learning process by providing students and teachers
with access to information and teaching materials from around the
world. In addition, as a result of the fiscal constraints and
rising costs facing public schools, information technologies that
offer new opportunities, efficiencies, and improvements in the
education process are highly desirable.

Libraries. Public libraries have traditionally served as a
repository of information for citizens. In the Information Age,
libraries will play an increasingly important role because a
changing economy requires that workers continuously learn new
skills. Connecting libraries to the NII is critical to ensuring
that all Americans can obtain information and services and
benefit from life-long learning opportunities, regardless of
economic circumstances and geography. This report finds that
individuals who are well trained in using information technology
gain important economic benefits.

Health Care Organizations. In health care, information technology
is also playing an increasingly important role in helping
Americans access quality health care and in enabling health care
providers to streamline their eligibility determination and
billing procedures. A recent study has concluded that America's
health care costs can be reduced by more than $36 billion each
year by applying selected telecommunications applications
nationwide. These cost reductions in the health care industry
will flow to patients, employers, and government. Advances in
data storage and communications technologies are also improving
access to quality health care services through applications such
as telemedicine.

Current Status. A review of the status of Internet connectivity
at public institutions reveals two important facts. First, these
institutions are beginning to use information technology. A
foothold has been made. Second, many still remain unconnected,
especially those that serve Americans most at risk to become
information "have nots."

Specifically, only three percent of K-12 classrooms are connected
to the Internet. Recent surveys show that only 21 percent of
public libraries are connected, and the vast majority of these
connections are in urban areas. Although no data are available
concerning the extent of Internet access in clinics, only 23
percent of the Nation's hospitals are connected. These
deficiencies are relevant because economic competition in the
21st Century will demand that our public institutions are on the
cutting edge in preparing society for the future.

Approximately one-fourth of American households have computers,
but computer ownership is highly correlated to family income and
education. Thus, public institutions will play a critical role in
assuring public access to the economic and social benefits of the
Information Age, especially for those who do not have computers
at home. This report finds that low-income groups and rural areas
tend to have less access to information technology at home and in
public schools and libraries.

     Federal Government Role. The Federal Government has a
     critical role to play in ensuring that public institutions   
  are connected to the NII. The Clinton Administration has     
created funding programs to assist in the connection of     
public institutions. Federal Government support and
     investment have led to an accelerated pace in connecting     
public institutions and have stimulated private-sector     
investment.

     One example, which is creating many success stories, is the  
   Telecommunications and Information Infrastructure Assistance   
  Program (TIIAP), administered by the National
     Telecommunications and Information Administration. The TIIAP 
    is exemplary of how the Federal Government plays a vital     
role in stimulating private investment and partnerships     
between public and private entitiesþtwo indispensable
     factors for ensuring that public institutions become and     
remain active participants in the NII. This program has     
enabled the Federal Government to leverage $24.4 million in     
Federal funding to provide a total of $64.4 million for     
cutting edge demonstration projects for non-profit
     institutions and state and local governments. Establishing   
  demonstration projects also ensures that there are
     successful "models" that can be duplicated easily by other   
  public institutions, serving as a catalyst for similar     
efforts.

     The Federal Government is also instrumental in working with  
   the private sector and public institutions to establish a     
strategic vision for NII development and deployment. A     
shared vision is important because economies of scale and     
scope can be captured by aggregating demand. Proactive     
Federal participation in NII activity also encourages
     equitable deployment of networks and new communications and  
   information technologies, so that rural and economically     
distressed communities and low-income and disadvantaged     
individuals can gain access to the NII.  

Highlights

     Chapter I of the report reviews the NII initiative and     
discusses the importance of being connected to the NII. 

     Chapter II provides an overview of the level of connectivity 
    of U.S. public institutions to the NII.

     Chapter III highlights how communities and government are    
 successfully partnering with the private sector to promote     
the development of public "on-ramps" to the NII, with
     Federal Government funding serving as a catalyst.

     Chapter IV describes NTIA programs and initiatives that are  
   helping to accelerate the connection of public institutions    
 to the NII.


Table of Contents

Executive Summary

     Highlights

Table of Contents

Introduction

Benefits of Connecting to the National Information Infrastructure

     Economic Benefits
     Social Benefits
     Public Institutions Must Meet the Information Age Challenge

Status of Connecting the Nation:

Public Institutions and the NII

     Public Schools (K-12)
     Public Libraries
     Hospitals and the Health Care Industry
     Summary

NII Partnerships

     Public and Private Partnerships for Education
     Partnerships for Connecting Public Libraries
     Telemedicine and Health Care Organizations on the NII

NTIA Programs and Initiatives

     Telecommunications and Information Infrastructure Assistance 
         Program 
     Public Telecommunications Facilities Program (PTFP)
     PEACESAT
     Conclusion

Works Cited

     Reports and Major Speeches
     Periodicals

Table 1. Percentage of public schools having access to selected   
  telecommunications capabilities
and the specific location of telecommunications within the
     school, by capability: 1994 

Table 2. Percentage of public schools having access to various    
 types of computer networks:
1994

Table 3. Percentage of public schools having access to the
     Internet and the percent of all
instructional rooms across the country with an Internet
     connection, by school characteristics:
1994


Introduction

     We are moving from an Industrial Age built on gears and     
sweat to an Information Age demanding skills and
     learning and flexibility.
  President Bill Clinton, January 24, 1995, State of the Union
Address.

The Clinton Administration's National Information Infrastructure
(NII) initiative strives to connect people to one another and to
services and information in new and cutting edge ways.
Extraordinary advances in telecommunications and information
technology are transforming how we work, learn, and communicate.
These advances offer opportunities to improve the Nation's
economy, government, and educational and health care delivery
systems. Through public and private investment, America's
information infrastructure is evolving into an interconnected
network of networks, allowing us to share information and to
communicate as local, national, and global communities. 
But, for many Americans, the opportunity to obtain information,
goods, and services easily, and to communicate with others via
the NII, will depend on whether advanced telecommunications and
information services are widely accessible and affordable.
Federal support, therefore, has been targeted to assuring
accessibility and affordability, with the aim of preventing us
from evolving into a nation of information "haves" and "have
nots."
The development of an advanced information and communications
infrastructure that serves the needs of the public and private
sectors is a priority for the Clinton Administration. The NII
initiative was launched in September 1993 by Vice President
Albert Gore and Secretary of Commerce Ronald H. Brown with the
release of The National Information Infrastructure: Agenda for
Action.y[1] The Agenda for Action provides an overall blueprint
or vision for leveraging the power of information and
communications technology. Specifically, the Agenda for Action
presents a flexible policy blueprint for encouraging and
stimulating further development of the NII. In keeping with this
agenda, the Clinton Administration has proposed nine fundamental
principles to guide the initiative:      o    promoting private-
sector investment;
     o    extending the "universal service" concept to ensure
that           information resources are available to all at
affordable           prices;
     o    acting as a catalyst to promote technological
innovation           and new applications;
     o    promoting seamless, interactive, user-driven operation
of           the NII;
     o    ensuring information security and network reliability;  
    o    improving management of the radio frequency spectrum;    
 o    protecting intellectual property rights;
     o    coordinating with other levels of government and with   
       other nations; and
     o    providing access to government information and
improving           government procurement.y[2]
Vice President Gore subsequently articulated five principles
which form the basis for the Administration's agenda for
telecommunications legislative reform:
     o    encouraging private investment;
     o    providing and protecting competition;
     o    providing open access to the networks;
     o    avoiding creating information "haves" and "have nots";  
        and
     o    encouraging flexibility and responsive government       
   action.y[3]
In January 1994, Vice President Gore announced the
Administration's commitment to connect every classroom, library,
hospital, and clinic in the United States to the NII by the year
2000. Concerned that the United States faces the risk of a
widening gap between the information "haves" and "have nots," the
Administration seeks to ensure that public institutions can serve
as public access sites so that all Americans, regardless of
income, location, or disability, can benefit from the NII. The
Vice President stated that we "must do this to realize the full
potential of information to educate, to save lives, provide
access to health care and lower medical costs."y[4]
By connecting public institutions to the NII, traditionally
unserved and underserved groups, including the poor, ethnic and
racial minorities, rural Americans, and disabled individuals,
will have greater opportunities to access and benefit from the
NII. To accelerate strategic development of the NII and to ensure
widespread civic participation, the Administration has created
shared-funding programs and has encouraged public-private
partnerships. These efforts are described in greater detail in
Chapter IV. Strategies that promote and foster public-private
partnerships will help make the NII as affordable and ubiquitous
as possible.


Benefits of Connecting to the National Information Infrastructure

The rapid development of communications and information
technologies heralds an age of enormous economic and social
opportunities. The Information Age has arrived. Powerful and
revolutionary technological and economic forces are driving a
transformation of our economy and our lives as the rigors of
competition increasingly supplant a system of regulated
monopolies. The most dominant forces are: 1) technological
advances (e.g., digital compression, more powerful computers, and
new wireless services); 2) decreasing prices for computers and
telecommunications services; and 3) the convergence of
information and communications services and technologies. 
As information and communication technologies continue to become
integral instruments for competing in the global economy, timely
access to these technologies and services will be vital for
sustaining the competitive advantage of the United States and
strengthening U.S. leadership in the electronics and information
technology sector. Increasingly, economic success will depend on
the ability to leverage technology effectively and strategically
for competitive advantage. These forces not only will affect the
American economy but also will have far-reaching effects on our
ability to attain important social goals. 

Economic Benefits

U.S. businesses have begun to recognize the importance of
investing in information technologies for gaining competitive
advantage. In fact, 1991 was the first year in which U.S.
companies invested larger sums on computing and communications
equipment than on industrial, mining, farm and construction
machines.y[5] Today, computers in the work place are common. In
1984, 25 percent of workers used computers on the job; in 1993,
47 percent did.y[6]  In 1994, The Los Angeles Times reported that
telecommunications is now the world's largest economic sector,
with a strategic
importance that surpasses that of oil or steel.y[7] For example,
it is estimated by Anderson Consulting that the global
telecommunications sector will represent a $1.1 trillion industry
by the year 2000. Today the telecommunications and information
sectors generate more than $600 billion in annual revenues.y[8]
The earnings from the U.S. telecommunications sector are more
than $172 billionþand that does not include the $26 billion
television market, the $25 billion computer software market, the
$14 billion-a-year cable television market, or the $13 billion
home video market. Estimates and projections vary, but the
economic impact of an accelerated deployment of the NII has been
estimated to increase U.S. GDP by $194-$321 billion by the year
2007, and increase productivity by 20 to 40 percent.y[9] 
It is not just telecommunications technology and information
services which are adding value to the American economy. Computer
and software sales also are contributing to the nation's economic
expansion. In 1992, the global market for computer sales
(excluding software) totalled $318 billion.y[10] In fact, twenty
years ago, only 50,000 computers existed in the entire world.
Today, more than 50,000 computers are sold every ten hours.y[11]
The potential for economic gain will exist for small and large
businesses because computers and communications networks are
becoming more affordable and easier to use. In addition,
businesses are benefiting from the information revolution by
using information technology to streamline their inventories,
increase productivity and identify new markets. These new markets
have already created a positive effect on the national economy,
since small businesses are helping to create many of the new jobs
in the United States. Other indications that the transition to an
information-intensive economy is underway can be seen in how
businesses are using information technologies to provide new
services and/or reinvent themselves through telecommuting and
electronic commerce
initiatives. In 1990 there were an estimated 2 million
telecommuters in the United States. That number increased to 7.8
million by 1994. By the year 2001, there will be an estimated 30
million telecommuters. The growth in the use of electronic mail
is another example. In 1985, there were only 300,000 registered
electronic mail users. In 1993 an estimated 12 million Americans
regularly used electronic mail and related on-line services.y[12]
Today, the number of electronic mail users is estimated to be
more than 27 million.y[13]
The telecommunications technology sector of the U.S. economy is
creating jobs that did not exist twenty years ago. Overall, the
revolution in this sector is helping lead the way for new
economic opportunities and high-paying jobs for American workers
in the 21st Century. One estimate projects 500,000 new jobs in
the
telecommunications sector by 1995.y[14] As computers and advanced
telecommunications are now essential tools in the workplace, it
will become increasingly important that individuals obtain the
necessary training and education to become computer literate and
to be able to "navigate" information networks. Economic growth
will in many ways depend on whether the Nation's labor force has
the necessary education and training to be competitive in the
global economy. It is estimated that 60 percent of the new jobs
in the year 2010 will require skills possessed by only 22 percent
of workers today.y[15]

Social Benefits

The NII can facilitate the delivery of tremendous social
benefits. With advanced information technology, Americans not
only can benefit economically but can enhance the overall quality
of life. We can create a government that costs less and is more
responsive to public needs. We can improve the delivery of
quality health care through technologies that allow rural and
remote communities to have access to specialists in urban medical
centers. We can and should improve access to education for those
in rural, remote, and disadvantaged areas because no child should
be deprived of
equitable opportunities for education.
The NII offers some valuable "payoffs" for American society. For
example, the NII will provide opportunities for distance learning
so that children will be able to communicate with teachers and
students in other schools, as well as take courses that are not
available in their communities. Linking schools to each other and
to the Nation's best educational resources will help the United
States remain a preeminent economic power by providing American
industry with a well-trained labor force. School teachers will
find that their job functions will expand, since they will need
to become more creative in supplementing their curricula with
multimedia technology.
Besides helping to create a computer literate work force,
information technology in the classroom can help level the
playing field for students of different socio-economic
backgrounds and reduce the divide between information "haves" and
"have nots." By having access to information in voice, data,
full-motion video, and/or multimedia format, students can explore
new ways of learning and communicating. Through the NII, students
of all ages and backgrounds can access a museum's collection,
browse through an electronic library, communicate with
instructors via interactive video, learn another language, or
communicate with other students using electronic mail. 
Many Americans view their public libraries as a source for
accessing and obtaining valuable information and other services.
As of 1994, there were 15,312 public libraries in the United
States.y[16] Accordingly, public libraries can play a vital role
in assuring that advanced information services are universally
available to all segments of the American population on an
equitable basis. Just as libraries have traditionally made
available the marvels and imagination of the human mind to all,
libraries of the future are planning to allow everyone to
participate in the electronic renaissance.
In 1994, the American public spent $1 trillion on health care,
nearly 15 percent of the Nation's Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
According to the Office of Actuary at the Health Care financing
Administration, national health care expenditures have risen by
10.5 percent per year for the past 8 yearsþmore than double the
rate of increase in the consumer price index.y[17] Capitalizing
on opportunities for reducing health care costs will be vital to
improving the Nation's economic outlook. Arthur D. Little, Inc.
has concluded that "America's health care expenditures can be
reduced by more than $36 billion each year by applying selected
telecommunications applications nationwide. These cost reductions
in the health care industry will flow to patients, employers, and
government, who ultimately provide the source of funds."y[18]
These social goals depend on ensuring broad availability of
access to technology and information across the U.S. By promoting
the connection of public institutions to the NII, even those who
do not have access through their homes or workplaces can benefit
from these advances.

Public Institutions Must Meet the Information Age Challenge

The commitment to provide universal access to the NII is a
central element of the Administration's overall NII strategy.
During the 1994 State of the Union Address, President Clinton
echoed Vice President Gore's challenge to connect the Nation:
     "...the Vice President is right: We must work with the     
private sector to connect every classroom, every clinic,     
every library, and every hospital in America to a
     national information highway by the year 2000. Instant     
access to information will increase productivity, help     
educate our children, and provide better medical care and     
create jobs."y[19]
In order to achieve this goal, the Administration has created
funding programs to assist public institutions (among others) in
connecting to the NII. One notable example is the
Telecommunications and Information Infrastructure Assistance
Program (TIIAP), administered by the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration (NTIA) (described in Chapter III).
Connecting public institutions to the NII increases the
likelihood that these institutions can provide Americans with the
necessary education and training to compete in the 21st Century
economy. It will help to ensure that access is not only available
to those who can afford to pay, but that communities can provide
some minimal access for those who cannot afford to pay. 

By promoting the connection of public institutions to the NII,
even those who do not have access in other ways can benefit from
these advances. For example, the U.S. Bureau of the Census
compiled information indicating that the presence of home
computer
technology is highly dependent on the income and educational
level of the household. Census reports that 25.5 percent of U.S.
households have one or more personal computers, including systems
provided by employers or schools.y[20] Public institutions can
play an important role in preventing households lacking computers
from becoming information "have nots."
Connecting the Nation to the NII will require cooperation and
collaboration at all levels of government, with the private
sector as a full partner. The transition to a nation connected to
the NII will be challenging, because many of the Nation's public
institutions are either using obsolete computer technology or
lack the funding for establishing communication links to the
emerging NII. In fact, when it comes to telecommunications
services, schools are among the most impoverished institutions in
society.


Status of Connecting the Nation:  Public Institutions and the NII

A review of the status of Internet connectivity at public
institutions shows that progress is underway. Yet, far too many
public institutions, especially schools, lack interconnection
with the emerging Information Age. This deficiency is relevant
because economic competition in the 21st Century will demand that
our nation's educational institutions are on the cutting edge in
educating and training American workers. Success has been
achieved in many schools, libraries, and health care
organizations.
Continuing to push forward with the goals of the Agenda for
Action will bring these opportunities to every American.
There is no single definition of what constitutes connectivity to
the NII. The level of access to the Internet, however, may serve
as a useful benchmark for determining the extent to which public
institutions (i.e., K-12 schools, public libraries, and public
and private non-profit hospitals) are connected to the NII as
well as each other. Internet connectivity is a valid measure
because the Internet is becoming an increasingly important
gateway to the NII.

Public Schools (K-12)

The value of having access to advanced telecommunications and
information services in America's public schools is clear: the
work force of the 21st Century will need to be familiar with
information technologies, adept at information gathering, and
comfortable with the manipulation and interpretation of data. In
order to help prepare and train much of tomorrow's labor force,
educational institutions will need to be equipped with
information technologies and communications networks that are
integral to these processes. Students who do not learn to use
computers and information
technology in schools will not be competitive in the job market.
Research indicates that, "schools have a long way to go before
they can provide what might be called a 'computer-rich
environment' for their students."y[21] In 1992, U.S. public
schools had one computer for every 13 students, and the majority
of these systems were not networked. Projections suggest that by
late 1995, U.S. schools will have "5.8 million computers for use
in instructionþabout one for every nine students."y[22] Computer
networks, especially wide-area networks (WANs), provide the means
to access information stored in databases around the world. WANs
give students and teachers the opportunity to communicate and
access information on a vast range of topics on a global basis.
This information often contains video and voice that augments the
text or data. 
When and how computers and networks are deployed in schools is
one of the most important questions facing educators today. An
equitable distribution of computers and network connections in
classrooms will give all children in K-12 schools (regardless of
income or geography) an opportunity to learn at an individualized
pace suited to their abilities, and access to vast amounts of
information from around the world.y[23]
Despite improvements in the number of computers and networks
deployed in schools, distribution of computers remains uneven
throughout the United States. Teachers in affluent and suburban
schools are more likely to work in a high-tech environment than
teachers in poor and inner-city schools. Overall, "the density of
computers in comparison to the number of potential student users
remains small .... students attending large schools, Hispanic
students, and schools with large minority enrollments are the
most disadvantaged in terms of the þdensity' of computers (per
capita number of computers) at the schools they attend."y[24] A
recent report by the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO)
concludes that: "Overall, schools in central cities and schools
with a 50-percent or more minority population are more likely to
have more
insufficient technology elements...."y[25]
The National Center for Education Statistics recently completed a
survey of advanced telecommunications in U.S. public schools (K-
12).y[26] Some of the noteworthy findings include:
     o    Overall, 35 percent of public schools have access to
the           Internet.
     o    Only three percent of all instructional rooms
          (classrooms, labs and media centers) in public schools  
        are connected to the Internet.
     o    Only 40 percent of public schools having computers with 
         telecommunications capabilities indicated that these
were           located in classrooms. The type of
telecommunications           systems most often located in
classrooms are broadcast           television and cable
television.

     o    While 75 percent of public schools have access to some  
        kind of computer network, only 49 percent have access to  
        a wide area networkþ35 percent of public schools have     
     access to the Internet and 14 percent have access to         
 other wide area networks (e.g., CompuServe, America          
Online, Prodigy).
     o    Sixty-seven percent of public schools have plans to     
     implement or upgrade to a wide area computer network. Of     
     these, 81 percent indicate that their telecommunications     
     plans are part of a district-level plan, 27 percent are      
    part of a state plan, and 19 percent are part of a          
regional plan.
     o    Smaller schools with enrollments of less than 300       
   students are less likely to be on the Internet than          
schools with larger enrollments. Only 30 percent of small         
 schools reported having Internet access, while 58 percent        
  of schools with enrollments of 1,000 or more reported          
having Internet access.
     o    Only 30 percent of public elementary schools have       
   Internet access, compared with 49 percent for secondary        
  schools.
The Administration and the States are working to forge
cooperative ventures with the private sector for accelerating the
pace of connecting schools to the NII. By establishing policies
that provide incentives for creating public-private partnerships,
the likelihood of a successful transition in which all public
institutions get connected will be greater. Providing schools
with computers and advanced telecommunications will facilitate
distance learning, Internet access, and multimedia educational
services in the classroom.y[27] In addition to providing funding
and training, ensuring equitable access to the NII for
educational institutions will ultimately be reflected in higher
productivity, economic growth, and an enhanced standard of living
for Americans.

Public Libraries

Today, 21 percent of the public libraries in the U.S. have
Internet access. In addition, only 12.7 percent of those
libraries with Internet access provide their patrons with public
access
computer/kiosk terminals.y[28] Moreover, the deployment of
information technology and communications networks in public
libraries is not evenly distributed in terms of geography (i.e.,
urban versus rural communities). According to the National
Commission on Libraries and Information Science, 78.9 percent of
urban public libraries have Internet access, while only 16.8
percent of public libraries in rural areas have Internet
access.y[29] 
A comprehensive survey of public libraries in the U.S.,
commissioned by the National Commission on Libraries and
Information Sciences, resulted in some important findings
regarding library access to the NII. Some of those key findings
include:      

o    public library access to the Internet is not equitable,     
o    public libraries serving larger communities are more         
 likely to have access to Internet than public libraries          
serving smaller communities,
     o    there are regional variations in public library
Internet           connectivity,
     o    few public libraries offer direct access to the
Internet,      o    public libraries are using Internet services
to
            -  procure answers to reference inquiries
            -  access Federal information resources
            -  perform interlibrary loan transactions, and
     o    Federal assistance for connecting public libraries to
the           Internet is required. 
Many of the cost-saving strategies employed by States for K-12
institutions (e.g., aggregating demand for services and hardware,
and leveraging state owned/operated networks) are applicable for
accelerating Internet access for public libraries. Statewide
initiatives for connecting public libraries to the Internet
(especially rural libraries) have been instrumental in
stimulating interest by libraries, generating funding, and
fostering
partnership building. States such as Iowa, Maryland, New York,
and North Carolina are involved in establishing Federal-State
partnerships for connecting libraries to the NII. Federal
Government involvement in this area could help aggregate demand,
on a national level, for services and hardware, thus introducing
economies of scale and scope that help reduce costs.
It may be possible to accelerate the rate at which libraries are
connected to the NII by establishing connections provided by a
local free-net or community network. Currently, only 5.7 percent
of public libraries have network connections provided by a local
free-net or community net. The National Commission on Libraries
and Information Science observed that community networks, civic
networks, and free-nets are all types of electronic networks that
"improve access to information of all kinds to the general
public, or to targeted members of the local community who are
traditionally underserved. Civic network programming can provide
access to the Internet, job rosters, community listings,
educational resources, health information, and government
databases."y[30]
The National Commission on Libraries and Information Science
report also pointed out that the most important barriers to
acquisition or use of advanced telecommunications in public
libraries are: 1) the cost of telecommunications links for rural
libraries; and 2) the fact that librarians and administrators
tend to lack knowledge of the Internet.y[31]

Hospitals and the Health Care Industry

The NII holds promise for helping to restructure and enhance
America's health care delivery and administrative system. The
Clinton Administration's Committee on Applications and Technology
of the Information Infrastructure Task Force (IITF) notes that:   
  "Implementation of wide-area, comprehensive, integrated,     
networked information systems is a logical response to      the
challenges faced by the nation's health care delivery     
system. These challenges arise from several sources:
     dissatisfaction over rising health expenditures, in both     
private and public health care programs, concern over the     
personal health security issues of access and continuity      of
insurance coverage, and serious questions about the      uneven
quality and appropriateness of health care. These      challenges
are driving the health care system to a cost-     conscious,
competitive, market-based, managed care
     environment. In such an environment, information systems     
linked to the NII are destined to play a central
     role."y[32]
Information technology is playing an increasingly important role
in helping health care providers streamline their eligibility
determination and billing procedures. For example, Arthur D.
Little Inc. has concluded that "America's health care can be
reduced by more than $36 billion each year by applying selected
telecommunications applications nationwide. These cost reductions
in the health care industry will flow to patients, employers, and
government, who ultimately provide the source of funds."y[33] In
addition to capturing efficiencies in helping to determine
patient eligibility and in streamlining billing procedures,
advances in data storage and communications technologies are
improving access to quality health care services through
applications such as telemedicine. Telemedicine generally refers
to the use of telecommunications and medical technologies to
provide live interactive audiovisual communication between
physician and patient or between physician and practitioner in
distant locations, or to facilitate the exchange of medical
information for research and educational purposes.

Although there is no quantitative research to date about the
status of connecting clinics to the NII, there are some
benchmarks available for hospitals. 
     o    There are a total of 6,467 hospitals in the United      
    States. The National Library of Medicine (NLM) estimates      
    that there are over 4,000 medical libraries located at        
  hospital or academic/research institutions throughout the       
   Nation. About 2,000 of the medical libraries are in          
hospitals and another 2,000 are located at academic and          
research institutions. The NLM reports that approximately         
 24 percent of hospital libraries and 72 percent of          
medical research/academic libraries have Internet          
connections.y[34] 
     o    Because the majority of medical libraries are
accessible           by Internet, an electronic connection to
these
          institutions can provide a wealth of information to     
     health care organizations and practitioners. Many medical    
      libraries employ the Medical Literature Analysis and        
  Retrieval System (MEDLARS) on-line information system.          
MEDLARS reports that roughly 20 percent of all MEDLARS          
searches are conducted over the Internet.
As an example of how information technology is helping to improve
the provision of quality health care, physicians are increasingly
turning to on-line medical databases to diagnose difficult cases
and track new medical developments. A study of more than 450
Medline searches found that this service helped doctors in saving
lives and curing ailments, avoiding unnecessary procedures and
assisting patients in disputes with insurance companies. Another
report found on-line searches led to significantly lower costs
and shorter hospital stays. Currently, only about 20 percent of
practicing doctors are on-line.y[35]

Summary

Despite the progress that has been made in connecting schools,
libraries, and health care organizations to the Internet, there
is much work to do before all of these public institutions are
connected. Overall, the status of Internet access at public
institutions is:
     o    35 percent of K-12 public schools, 
     o    3 percent of K-12 public school classrooms,
     o    22 percent of hospitals, and
     o    21 percent of public libraries.
Research on Internet access shows that less affl8uent areas, such
as rural and minority communities, exhibit slow growth when it
comes to Internet access. According to the National Commission on
Libraries and Information Science, 78.9 percent of urban public
libraries have Internet access, while only 16.8 percent of public
libraries in rural areas have Internet access.y[36] 
Many public schools are also struggling when it comes to
implementing information technology. A review of the status of
Internet connectivity at public institutions, as well as the
accomplishments of public and private programs to accelerate NII
development, shows that progress is underway. Yet, far too many
public institutions, especially schools, lack interconnection
with the emerging information age. Overall, public schools in
central cities and schools with a 50-percent or more minority
population are more likely to have more insufficient technology
elements.y[37]

NII Partnerships

     "An interconnection of computer networks,
     telecommunication services and applications, the National    
 Information Infrastructure can open up new vistas and
     profoundly change much of America's life, not by the fact    
 that it exists but by the way it is used."
                   Ronald H. Brown, U.S. Secretary of Commerce

Connecting public institutions to the NII requires cooperation
within the public sector and collaboration with the private
sector. The formation of strategic partnerships among public
entities and the private sector is an integral part of the
Administration's overall NII strategy. Although the NII will be
built, owned, and operated by the private sector, the Federal
Government has a role in facilitating the transition to the
Information Age. By stimulating public-private partnerships, the
Federal Government can increase the public benefit from
investments in infrastructure development, such as telemedicine,
electronic libraries, and distance learning. 
At the Department of Commerce, the NTIA's Telecommunications and
Information Infrastructure Assistance Program (TIIAP) provides a
partnering model that accelerates NII investment by leveraging
private investments with limited Federal dollars. TIIAP supports
NII planning activities and demonstration projects at the
grassroots level throughout the Nation. Thus far, the TIIAP
initiative has leveraged public investments and created a strong
multiplier effect (i.e., for every dollar the Federal Government
invested in the 1994 TIIAP grants, the project partners provided
an additional $1.60 of matching funding). In October 1994, TIIAP
provided $24.4 million for 92 grants in 45 States and the
District of Columbia to plan, test, and/or stimulate NII
activities by non-profit institutions (i.e., school districts,
public libraries, state/local governments, and others). The
leveraging effects of the 1994 TIIAP awards resulted in a total
investment in public infrastructure of $64.4 million ($24.4
million in TIIAP funds and $40 million in matching funds).
Moreover, by directing funding towards demonstration projects and
planning efforts, particularly in disadvantaged areas, TIIAP
ensures that there are successful "models" that can be
duplicated easily by other public institutions. These models can
then serve as a catalyst for similar efforts, thereby leveraging
the initial Federal funding even further. The success of these
initial public-private partnerships also demonstrates that
private matching funds can be generated even in low-income,
rural, and other disadvantaged areas.
Examples of partnerships designed to foster NII development
demonstrate that, with shared commitment to NII development, the
Nation as a whole can benefit. In urban as well as rural areas,
public entities and the private sector are teaming up to upgrade
the information infrastructure. The range of applications being
explored through public-private partnerships is extensive,
ranging from law enforcement to education to delivery of
government services. 
They each demonstrate how Federal funding can stimulate
innovation and opportunity, especially for low-income, rural, and
disabled Americans. The following examples demonstrate how
Federal Government funding is serving as a catalyst in promoting
public-private partnerships to ensure that public institutions
are connected to the NII.

Public and Private Partnerships for Education

     o    Education in the State of Alaska. The University of     
     Alaska, the State of Alaska, the K-12 education
          system, public broadcasting, the library community,     
     and the community at large will integrate diverse          
networks which will result in 81 percent of the
          population of Alaska having non-toll access to a
          combined education/government/library network. The      
    University will determine approaches to K-12 access          
using direct connection in some cases and/or dial up          
access to leased lines or frame relay systems of the          
University and State government. The Fairbanks
          Northstar Borough School District will be the direct    
      access site and the Sitka area is applying for a
          separate planning grant to develop regional access.     
     The project will also connect community networks in          
Anchorage, Fairbanks, and Juneau, and will integrate          
the University ITV system with public broadcasting          
facilities for cost effective delivery of distance          
education. Private- sector funding is provided by          
Alascom. TIIAP Funds Awarded: $612,506. Total Project          
Cost: $1,608,583.
     o    Schools in Siskiyou County, California. The Siskiyou    
      County Office of Education in Yreka, California, will       
   extend their present network service to the 29 area          
school districts. This process will begin with the          
creation of SISnet, with a TCP/IP connection to each          
school in the system. Pacific Bell will contribute 46          
ISDN lines for this effort. The second step will be a          
connection to the California State University network          
(CSUnet) for full Internet access. Upon completion,           the
network will provide Internet, audio-visual,
          library, e-mail, health, and business support services  
        to this predominantly rural area. The project is
          receiving private-sector funding from Pacific Bell and  
        Gandalt Company. TIIAP Funds Awarded: $120,000. Total     
     Project Cost: $359,735.
     o    Port Hueneme, California, School District. The Hueneme  
        School District of Port Hueneme, California, will act     
     as the hub connection for three community schools who        
  will participate in a national high quality video          
distribution test. The system demonstration includes          
three components: distance
          instruction/teleconferencing, video on demand and       
   delivery of interactive multimedia courses. The
          project will test the use of fractal compression
          technology to deliver high quality interactive video    
      signals over long distance using existing low band-         
width (ISDN) telecommunications infrastructure,
          supplied by MCI. The other school districts
          participating in this test are Savannah-Chathan School  
        District in Savannah, Georgia and the Berryessa Union     
     School District in San Jose, California. MCI and Total       
   Multi Media Inc., are proving matching funds. TIIAP          
Funds Awarded: $60,000. Total Project Cost: $445,759.      o   
Jefferson County, Kentucky School District. Jefferson          
County Public School District will design the
          infrastructure necessary to link its 96,000 students,   
       11,000 employees and 170 sites to the larger national      
    information infrastructure. The plan will also take          
into consideration the development of the Kentucky          
Education Technology System (KETS), a major statewide          
initiative to establish high performance linkages           among
educational institutions in the state. Local           telephone
and cable companies are providing private-          sector
funding. TIIAP Funds Awarded: $10,695. Total           Project
Cost: $58,893.
     o    St. Joseph, Missouri School District The St. Joseph     
     Missouri School District will act as the lead agency         
 in the development of a seamless, multi-user, fiber          
optic, metropolitan network. Through a partnership           with
the local cable company, all 30 public school           sites in
Buchanan County will be connected to local           and national
resources via lines dedicated for
          educational use. This single effort by the local
          school board will connect all educational institutions  
        to the larger network and will create local area
          networks (LAN) connecting each classroom in the
          system. Private-sector funding is provided by St.       
   Joseph Cablevision. TIIAP Funds Awarded: $262,250.          
Total Project Cost: $5,447,250.
     o    Hall, Montana School District Hall Elementary School    
      District No. 8, in rural southwest Montana, will
          install the town's first Internet connection in their   
       school building. This connection will provide the 25       
   students and 95 residents of the town with access to          
Montana statewide information services as well as          
national resources. Connection facilities will be          
placed in the two room school building and will be          
available to all residents. The Blackfoot Telephone          
Cooperative is providing private-sector funding. TIIAP          
Funds Awarded: $3,000. Total Project Cost: $6,881.      o   
Green Valley High School, Henderson, Nevada Green          
Valley High School in Henderson, Nevada, a suburb of          
Las Vegas, will install a fiber optic local area
          network (LAN) in their building to interconnect the     
     library, classrooms and computer laboratories. The LAN       
   will then be connected by the InterAct project to the          
Internet. The project will provide network access for          
3,300 students and 135 professional staff members. The          
first National Bank of Nevada is providing private-         
sector funds. TIIAP Funds Awarded: $40,000. Total          
Project Cost: $85,800.
     o    Carnegie Mellon School Project. Carnegie Mellon's MPC   
       Corporation proposes further expansion of activities       
   in four schools that are a part of the National
          Science Foundation's testbeds for school networkingþ    
      two elementary schools, a middle school, and a high         
 schoolþwith emphasis on the study of foreign
          languages. With support from DEC and Tele-
          Communications, Incorporated, the four schools, a       
   community center, and the Carnegie Library will be          
connected to the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center           using
DEC's Channel Works ethernet over CATV
          technology, which will provide a 10 Mbps connection to  
        the Internet via the center. The project will examine     
     this technology as a potential model for school
          interconnects in urban settings. Private-sector
          funding is provided by Digital Equipment Corporation    
      and TCI of Pennsylvania. TIIAP Funds Awarded:
          $551,094. Total Project Cost: $1,102,572.

Partnerships for Connecting Public Libraries 

The library community has been active in seeking to ensure that
libraries have access to the Internet and the emerging NII. Like
schools, many libraries are attempting to make information and
communications technology an integral part of their mission in
serving the community. Libraries are working to form alliances
and attract private-sector financing for a number of projects
that require technology and technical support, and Federal
funding is an important catalyst in this effort.
     o    The San Francisco Connection Library Project. The San   
       Francisco Connection is a TIIAP-funded Project that        
  facilitates the San Francisco Public Library in
          spearheading a project to enhance the delivery of       
   social services, including education, culture, and          
health care. The entire Human Services cluster of City          
Departments will participate in building the database          
and information infrastructure. Non-profit partners          
include KQED-TV (Learning Link), KALW-FM, San
          Francisco State University, and the Whole Earth
          'Lectronic Link (WELL). Pacific Bell is the private-    
     sector partner. TIIAP Funds awarded: $425,000. Total         
 Project Cost: $1,289,474.
     o    Charlotte's Web, North Carolina. Charlotte's Web
          network, in the Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill (SC)       
   area, provides citizens and school children with
          access to information resources. Coalition members      
    include the Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg
          County; Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools; Central
          Piedmont Community College; WTVI-TV; the University of  
        North Carolina; Southern Bell; Time Warner Cable; and     
     Vision Cable. Initially, 114 public access terminals         
 will be located in libraries, neighborhood and senior          
centers, shelters, health care facilities, classrooms,          
and school libraries. Extensive computer literacy          
training will be provided, and the system will be          
linked to the North Carolina Information Highway, a          
fiber network connecting rural and urban areas with          
broadband data and video. The system will employ
          switched multi-megabit data service (SMDS), Unix
          servers, Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT)
          technology, and expanded interactive video using ATM.   
       Private-sector partners are, Time Warner, Southern         
 Bell, and Vision Cable. TIIAP Funds Awarded: $450,000.          
Total Project Cost: $1,240,000.
     o    Information Infrastructure Project, Newark, New
          Jersey. The Newark Electronic Information
          Infrastructure Demonstration Project will purchase and  
        install advanced telecommunications equipment in five     
     locations and provide specialized electronic
          information and communication resources. The project    
      is designed as a component of ewark's Empowerment Zone      
    plan, and targets 55,213 residents, businesses and          
entrepreneurs, community-based organizations, and          
children and students who live, work, or attend school          
in the 27 Empowerment Zone tracts. Secondary
          beneficiaries will be the balance of the city's
          275,000 residents. The basis of the system is a
          Hewlett-Packard Model 800G Unix-based mainframe, Dell   
       file servers, a local network operating from a Sun         
 SPARC station, public access workstations, and a wide          
area network connecting the Central Library, a branch          
library, and City Hall to Bell Atlantic's fiber optic          
ring serving the City of Newark. TIIAP Funds Awarded:          
$550,000. Total Project Cost: $1,429,770
     o    Danbury, Connecticut Public Library. The Danbury
          Public Library serves 187,000 users in the Connecticut  
        Housatonic Valley. The grant project will support         
 planning for a community FreeNet that would enhance          
delivery of civic, consumer, social, and business          
services, and provide Internet access and worldwide          
electronic messaging. The project would develop a           model
FreeNet planning process for the state of
          Connecticut and establish a pool of experienced
          individuals who can share their expertise with future   
       FreeNet ventures. The planning process would identify      
    networks and systems currently available, determine          
the feasibility of incorporating existing
          infrastructure into the FreeNet, and address questions  
        of access and future capacity. Private funding is         
 provided by General Data Communications. TIIAP Funds          
Awarded: $16,000. Total Project Cost: $33,220.
     o    Southeastern Library Network. The Southeastern Library  
        Network (SOLINET) is planning to develop regional         
 strategies for information distribution and access,          
using the Monticello Electronic Library Project as the          
basis for a Public Information Project; an Unlocking          
University Information Initiative (dealing with
          university and scholarly publication); and the
          Southeastern Special Collections Access (SESCA)
          project. The objectives of each component are: (1) to   
       build consensus regarding information access and
          distribution issues and strategies among universities,  
        colleges, educators, state legislative and governors'     
     offices, state agencies, state telecommunications          
directors, state archives/libraries, and the general          
citizenry; and (2) to evaluate potential demonstration          
and production projects. Cox Cable and the Atlanta          
Journal-Constitution are providing private-sector          
funding. TIIAP Funds Awarded: $470,400. Total Project          
Cost: $966,792.

Telemedicine and Health Care Organizations on the NII

Today, telecommunications networks are being developed to
expedite health care delivery. As a result, medical specialists
around the country will be able to communicate easily, and
standardized medical information and insurance data will be more
readily available. Most important, geography will no longer be a
barrier to medical treatment. 
Most states have instituted telemedicine applications and a
number of states have initiated state-wide telemedicine networks
which link hospitals with rural areas.y[38] Public-private
partnerships, such as those stimulated by TIIAP, are helping to
ensure that rural and remote communities have access to quality
health care via telecommunications. 
The following TIIAP projects are some examples of how public-
private partnerships are bringing the benefits of the NII to the
health care community. Some notable examples which are
benefiting from Federal funding are:
     o    Community Health Information Network, Boise, Idaho.     
     The Boise State University Center of Health Policy has       
   begun to plan for a Community Health Information
          Network (CHIN) that would serve the Magic Valley
          region of southern Idaho and northern Nevada. The CHIN  
        would integrate and automate the clinical functions of    
      six hospitals, 200 physicians in their offices, Public      
    Health, and other ancillary health care professionals.        
  Among the services envisioned for the CHIN are
          electronic capture of patient encounter information,    
      integration of the clinical information systems of all      
    providers, expert system software to provide alerts          
and reminders to care providers, and incorporation of          
telemedicine technologies to serve remote, underserved          
areas. Private-sector funding is provided by Cerner          
Corporation of Kansas City, Missouri. TIIAP Funds          
Awarded: $136,284. Total Project Cost: $272,568.
     o    Telemedicine in North Carolina. The State of North      
    Carolina is linking emergency departments at each of          
the State's four medical centers affiliated with
          medical schools (Bowman Gray, Duke University, East     
     Carolina University, and the University of North
          Carolina Schools of Medicine) with five remote site     
     hospital emergency departments, including one military       
   base hospital emergency department, to provide
          teleconsultations (including general trauma consults,   
       as well as teleradiology consults, such as x-rays and      
    CT scans) during emergency situations. The project          
will utilize the broadband, ATM/SONET-based North          
Carolina Information Highway to connect the sites.          
Private-sector funding is provided by Bell South, GTE,          
Southern Bell, and Carolina Sprint. TIIAP Funds
          Awarded: $550,000. Total Project Cost: $2,393,140.     
o    Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, New          
York. Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, the New          
York City Department of Health, and the Visiting Nurse          
Services of New York City will collaborate to develop          
and demonstrate an information infrastructure to
          provide coordinated care to tuberculosis (TB) patients  
        in the home, in doctors' offices, and in the hospital.    
      The project will use automated decision-support
          systems, networks, interactive wireless hand-held       
   computers, and natural language processing technology          
to coordinate the many providers of care for TB
          patients, ensure that appropriate TB protocols are      
    followed, develop an infrastructure that could be used        
  in the treatment of other diseases, and demonstrate          
how electronic medical records can meet high standards          
of privacy and confidentiality. Private-sector funding          
is provided by IBM, NYNEX, and PI Systems. TIIAP Funds          
Awarded: $733,424. Total Project Cost: $2,576,521.      o   
University of Cincinnati Medical Center. Working with          
its partners, the University of Cincinnati Medical          
Center is improving access to health information to          
citizens of the Ohio Valley. Information on
          prescription drugs, diseases, wellness and general      
    health, alternative therapies, insurance, and
          physician referrals will be made available using the    
      Internet, regional online service providers, and other      
    channels. Anyone with a home computer in the tri-state        
  region will have access to the information, which will          
also be made available at public workstations. These          
public workstations will be placed in public
          libraries, health clinics, hospital waiting rooms, and  
        pharmacies. Private-sector funding is provided by         
 Apple Computer, Hopkins Technology, Info Access
          Company, Quanta Press, Walgreens Pharmacies, and
          several local television stations. TIIAP Funds
          Awarded: $375,000. Total Project Cost: $861,042.

NTIA Programs and Initiatives

The National Telecommunications and Information Administration
(NTIA)y[39] funds telecommunications infrastructure planning,
development, and applications in a number of important areas
(e.g., education, health care delivery and administration,
public safety, community development, and access to government
information). These projects emphasize the use of information and
communications technologies for addressing the information and
service delivery needs of public and non-profit
institutions.

Telecommunications and Information Infrastructure Assistance
Program (TIIAP)

NTIA administers the Telecommunications and Information
Infrastructure Assistance Program (TIIAP). TIIAP was created in
1994 and is a competitive, merit-based grant program that seeks
to accelerate the planning, development, and implementation of
NII applications at the state and local levels. TIIAP provides
matching funds (up to 50 percent of total project cost) to state
and local governments; school districts; hospitals, colleges and
universities; public libraries; and other community-based, non-
profit groups. TIIAP grant funding for FY94 totalled $24.4
million. Total investment as a result of the matching funds
requirement totalled almost $64.4 million. The multiplier
investment effect of the TIIAP is an example of the type of cost
sharing arrangements that can assist public institutions in
gaining access to the NII.
The TIIAP initiative includes an evaluation component that
requires a review of a number of pilot projects for their
effectiveness. Those projects that are determined to be of top
quality can be leveraged in order to create projects that are
scalable to a regional or national level. The knowledge base that
results from the program will be one of its most valuable
products.

Public Telecommunications Facilities Program (PTFP)

Administered by NTIA, the Public Telecommunications Facilities
Program (PTFP) is instrumental in assisting rural and remote
communities in gaining access to public broadcasting and
distance learning services and technologies. 
In 1994, NTIA awarded 29 distance learning grants through the
PTFP totaling $6.4 million. One example of a distance learning
grant was an award of $600,000 to help the University of Maine
construct a statewide distance learning channel that will offer
bachelor's and master's degree programs to residents unable to
regularly attend college in the traditional classroom setting. 
Other PTFP grants for educational services and technologies
include:
     o    The Massachusetts Corporation for Educational
          Telecommunications (MCET) has received PTFP and
          matching funds for planning and technology
          applications. In 1993, PTFP awarded funds to MCET to    
      conduct a feasibility test of interactive
          telecommunications through an interconnection system    
      to educational institutions, libraries, government          
agencies, prisons, hospitals, and other organizations          
statewide and beyond. The proposed network could
          potentially incorporate many forms of technology
          including satellite systems, Instructional Television   
       Fixed Service, cable television and fiber optic lines      
    for multiple channels of distribution.
     o    In 1993 and 1992, PTFP awarded funds to the Satellite   
       Education Resources Consortium (SERC). SERC is a Star-     
    Schools based initiative that uses communications          
technologies to deliver distance learning courses.           PTFP
funds and matching funds allow SERC to purchase           185
receive-only, C and Ku-band steerable satellite           earth
terminals for predominately small, rural
          secondary schools in Florida, Georgia, Michigan,
          Mississippi, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina,      
    Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Texas, West
          Virginia, and Wisconsin.
     o    Agricultural Satellite Corporation (AGSAT) is a non-    
     profit organization composed of Land Grant colleges          
and universities that provide agricultural courses and          
agricultural extension programs nationally by
          installing two Ku-band satellite uplinks in Arkansas    
      and New Hampshire. PTFP funding and matching funds are      
    being used by AGSAT to construct 43 Ku/C band
          satellite downlinks to be selected from sites in the    
      following states: Colorado, Delaware, Florida,
          Illinois, Indiana, Maine, Mississippi, Nebraska,
          Nevada, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Pennsylvania,    
      South Carolina, Tennessee, and West Virginia.
     o    The National Technological University (NTU) is a
          satellite network that provides information to small    
      and medium manufacturing establishments on improving        
  manufacturing competitiveness as part of the
          Manufacturing Extension Partnership initiative which    
      PTFP supports through a merit-based grant requiring         
 matching funds. PTFP and matching funds were also          
awarded to NTU in 1993 to expand the services of NTU           by
adding five channels of compressed digital video          
programming for distribution by Ku-band satellite. The          
equipment will permit the establishment of "on-demand"          
delivery of instructional programming to students at          
their place of work. 

PEACESAT

Through the PEACESAT program, NTIA supports the distribution of
public service satellite communications to the U.S. affiliated
territories and small island nations within the Pacific Ocean. 
The PEACESAT project was formed in 1971 when the University of
Hawaii established an experimental satellite system on NASA's
ATS-1 satellite to connect the small island nations of the
Pacific. PEACESAT continued to use the NASA satellite until 1985,
when the satellite finally ran out of station-keeping fuel and it
began to drift out of the Pacific. In 1988, the Congress directed
that NTIA restore the PEACESAT service. Using a
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
satellite, NTIA reestablished the PEACESAT service in 1990.
Today, the PEACESAT project provides noncommercial, educational,
medical, environmental and emergency communications services to
twenty Pacific Island nations and territories. 
The PEACESAT program operates through the cooperative efforts of
NTIA, the University of Hawaii, Federal agencies such as NOAA and
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and
educational institutions in the Pacific Islands.
NTIA awards funds to the University of Hawaii for support of the
operations of the PEACESAT headquarters in Honolulu and includes
funding for equipment to bring the PEACESAT system into the age
of digital communications. NOAA and NASA cooperate in the
operation of the GOES satellite which provides the backbone of
the PEACESAT satellite service.
In each of the participating Pacific Islands, a PEACESAT earth
terminal provides local organizations with a communications link
to the world. The earth terminals are located at colleges or
other educational or governmental institutions and provide
access to Internet, voice exchanges between the Pacific islands,
and access to resources in the United States and the rest of the
world. The PEACESAT terminals are community resource centers
which have not only encouraged the development of partnerships in
each island, but have strengthened partnerships between
organizations in different islands and in different countries. 
The project provides an efficient way for U.S. agencies, such as
the Departments of the Interior, Agriculture and Education, the
Public Health Service and the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, to deliver their services to these isolated island
regions. 

Conclusion

Connecting public institutions to the NII increases the
likelihood that these institutions can provide Americans with the
necessary education and training to compete in the 21st Century
economy. It will help to ensure that access is not only available
to those who can afford to pay, but that communities can provide
some minimal access for those who cannot afford to pay. 
A review of the status of Internet connectivity at public
institutions reveals two important facts. First, these
institutions are beginning to use information technology. A
foothold has been made. Second, many still remain unconnected,
especially those that serve Americans most at risk to become
information "have nots."
Approximately one-fourth of American households have computers,
but computer ownership is highly correlated to family income and
education. Thus, public institutions will play a critical role in
assuring public access to the economic and social benefits of the
Information Age, especially for those and do not have
computers at home. This report finds that low-income groups and
rural areas tend to have less access to information technology at
home and in public schools and libraries.
The Federal Government has a critical role to play in ensuring
that public institutions are connected to the NII. The Clinton
Administration has created funding programs to assist in the
connection of public institutions. Federal Government support and
investment have led to an accelerated pace in connecting public
institutions and have stimulated private-sector
investment.
The Federal Government is also instrumental in working with the
private-sector and public institutions to establish a strategic
vision for NII development and deployment. A shared vision is
important because economies of scale and scope can be captured by
aggregating demand. Proactive Federal participation in NII
activity encourages equitable deployment of networks and new
communications and information technologies, so that rural and
economically distressed communities and low-income and
disadvantaged individuals can gain access to the NII. 

Works Cited

Reports and Major Speeches

Arthur D. Little Inc. Telecommunications: Can It Help Solve
America's Health Care Problems? Cambridge, 1992.
Center For Public Service Communications. Telemedicine and
Information Technologies in Health Care Project Tracking
Document. Washington: CPSC, 1994.
Clinton, President William J. State of the Union Address.
Washington, D.C. 1995.
Clinton, President William J. State of the Union Address.
Washington, D.C. 1994.
Council of Economic Advisers. Economic Beneffts of the
Administration's Legislative Proposals For Telecommunications.
Washington: GPO, 1994.
Electronic Mail Users. Matrix Information and Directory
Services. Austin, Texas, 1994.
Gore, Vice President Albert. Address. Royce Hall. Los Angeles,
California. 11 Jan. 1994.
Irving, Assistant Secretary For Communications and Information
Larry. Address. COMDEX Conference. Las Vegas, Nevada. 15 Nov.
1993.
Lazarus, Wendy and Laurie Lipper. America's Children and the
Information Superhighway: A Brieffng Book and National Action
Agenda. 1994.
Preston, Jane. The Telemedicine Handbook: Improving Health Care
With Interactive Video. 1993.
United States. Congressional Office of Technology Assessment.
Analysis and Trends of School Use of New Information
Technologies. Washington: COTA, 1994.
United States. Congressional Office of Technology Assessment.
Teachers and Technology: Making the Connection. Washington: GPO,
1995.
United States. Department of Commerce, National Institute of
Standards and Technology. Putting the Information Infrastructure
to Work: Report of the Information Infrastructure Task Force
Committee on Applications and Technology. Washington: GPO, 1994.
United States. Department of Commerce, National
Telecommunications and Information Administration. The National
Information Infrastructure: Agenda For Action. Washington: GPO,
1993.
United States. Department of Education. Advanced
Telecommunications in U.S. Public Schools, K-12. Washington: GPO,
1995.
United States. Department of Education, National Center For
Education Statistics. Survey on Advanced Telecommunications in
U.S. Public Schools, K-12. Washington: GPO, 1994.
United States. General Accounting Office. School Facilities:
America's Schools Not Designed or Equipped For 21st Century.
Washington: GPO, 1995.
United States. National Commission on Libraries and Information
Services. Public Libraries and the Internet: Study Results,
Policy Issues, and Recommendations. Washington: GPO, 1994.

Periodicals

"American Library Directory, 1993-1994 edition." R.R. Bowker
Company.
Corcoran, Elizabeth. " High Tech Advocates For Children."
Washington Post 3 Oct. 1994.
Eckhouse, J. "Internet: Millions of Users Plug In To Hug
Computer Network." San Francisco Chronicle 1 June 1993: C&C7.
Helm, Leslie. "Battling For a Piece of the Global Pie." Los
Angeles Times 26 July 1994: C2.
Mandel, Michael J. "The Digital Juggernaut." Business Week-
Special Issue 12 July 1994.
Stewart, Thomas. "The Information Age." Fortune 4 Apr. 1993. "On
Line: More Doctors are Adding On-Line Tools to their Kits," Wall
Street Journal         7 Oct. 1994.


                           ENDNOTES

[1]Information Infrastructure Task Force, The National
Information Infrastructure: Agenda for Action, September 15,
1993.

[2]Information Infrastructure Task Force, The National
Information Infrastructure: Agenda for Action, op. cit.

[3]Vice President Al Gore, Speech at Royce Hall, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, January 11,
1994.

[4]Ibid.

[5]Michael J. Mandel, "The Digital Juggernaut," Business Week,
Special Issue on the Information Revolution, July 12, 1994, p.
23.

[6]Wendy Lazarus and Laurie Lipper, "America's Children & the
Information Superhighway: A Briefing Book and National Action
Agenda," (The Children's Partnership), September 1994.

[7]Leslie Helm, "Battling for a Piece of the Global Pie," Los
Angeles Times, July 26 1994, p. C2.

[8]National Telecommunications and Information Administration,
Internal Document.

[9]Assistant Secretary for Communications and Information Larry
Irving, Speech at COMDEX, Las Vegas, Nevada, November 15, 1993.
Information based on projections made by the Economic Strategy
Institute. 

[10]Thomas Stewart, "The Information Age," Fortune, April 4,
1993.

[11]National Telecommunications and Information Administration,
Internal Document.

[12]J. Eckhouse, "Internet: Millions of Users Plug in to Hug
Computer Network," San Francisco Chronicle, June 1, 1993, pp. C-
1, C-7.

[13]Matrix Information and Directory Services, Austin, Texas,
October, 1994.

[14]Council of Economic Advisers, "Economic Benefits of the
Administration's Legislative Proposals for Telecommunications,"
June 14, 1994, Washington, D.C.

[15]Elizabeth Corcoran, "High Tech Advocates for Children," The
Washington Post, October 3, 1994.

[16]American Library Directory, 1993-1994 edition, (R.R.
Bowker).

[17]U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Putting the Information Infrastructure to Work:
Report of the Information Infrastructure Task Force Committee on
Applications and Technology, May 1994, p. 43.

[18]Arthur D. Little, Inc., "Telecommunications: Can It Help
Solve America's Health Care Problems?" Cambridge, MA, July 1992,
p. 2.

[19]President Bill Clinton, State of the Union Address, January
25, 1994.

[20]U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Computer
Usage Supplement, (1994).

[21]Henry Jay Becker, "Analysis and Trends of School Use of New
Information Technologies", Contractor Report Prepared for the
Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, March 1994. p. 16.

[22]United States Congress, Office of Technology Assessment,
Teachers and Technology: Making the Connection, OTA-EHR-616
(Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office, April 1995),
p.1.

[23]A noteworthy initiative is the newly created National
Technology Funding Corporation (NETFC) which is designed to help
stimulate private investment in educational technology.

[24]Becker, op. cit., Executive Summary.

[25]United States General Accounting Office, School Facilities:
America's Schools Not Designed or Equipped for 21st Century,
April 1995, GAO/HEHS-95-95, p. 2.

[26]National Center for Education Statistics, "Advanced
Telecommunications in U.S. Public Schools, K-12" NCES Study,
prepared for the U.S. Department of Education, Office of
Educational Research and Improvement, February 1995, Report
number NCES 95-731, p. 3. See Connecting the Nation, Chapter II,
Table 1 and 2.

[27]Since roughly two-thirds of K-12 institutions report having
computers with some telecommunications capabilities in their
media centers/libraries, a viable approach is to provide all
public K-12 schools with networked computers (including
Internet) via their media centers. Ensuring full connectivity of
media centers located in schools could serve as an interim
strategy until the goal of connecting every classroom to the NII
is accomplished. 

[28]Charles R. McClure, John Carlo Berlot, and Douglas L.
Zweizig, "Public Libraries and the Internet: Study Results,
Policy Issues, and Recommendations," prepared for the National
Commission on Libraries and Information Sciences, Washington,
DC., June 1994. p. 17.

[29]McClure et al., op. cit., p. 18.

[30]McClure et al., op. cit., p. 7.

[31]McClure et al., op. cit., p. 8.

[32]U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards
and Technology, op. cit., p. 41.

[33]Arthur D. Little Inc., op. cit., p. 2.

[34]This is based on a survey conducted by the National Library
of Medicine which polled over 1,000 medical institutions in 1994.

[35]Wall Street Journal, "On Line: More Doctors are Adding On-
Line Tools to their Kits," October 7, 1994. p. B1.

[36]McClure et al., op. cit., p. 18.

[37]United States General Accounting Office, School Facilities:
America's Schools Not Designed or Equipped for 21st Century, op.
cit., p. 2.

[38] According to the Center for Public Service Communications,   
  there are over seventy projects in thirty-nine states. See     
Telemedicine and Information Technologies in Health Care     
Project Tracking Document, Center for Public Service
     Communications (1994).

[39]NTIA serves as the principal advisor to the President on
domestic and international communications and information policy
issues.

