				STATE OF DELAWARE



 

DELAWARE HEALTH 
AND SOCIAL SERVICES
DIVISION OF MANAGEMENT 
SERVICES
1901 N. DuPont Highway
New Castle, DE 19720




REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL NO.  PSC 693R

FOR

Clinical Care Information System (CCIS)

FOR

DIVISION OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND MENTAL HEALTH
FIRST FLOOR, MAIN BUILDING
1901 NORTH DUPONT HIGHWAY
NEW CASTLE, DE  19720

Deposit			Waived
Performance Bond		Waived

Date Due:  			September 13, 2006
       11:00 am, ET

A mandatory pre-bid meeting will be held on July 25, 2006, at 10:00 AM at 
the Delaware Health and Social Services, Herman M. Holloway Sr. 
Campus, Medical Library, Springer Building, 1901 N. DuPont Highway, New 
Castle, DE 19720.  PROPOSALS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED FROM VENDORS 
WHO ARE NOT IN ATTENDANCE AT THIS MEETING.

DELAWARE HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
DIVISION OF MANAGEMENT SERVICES
PROCUREMENT BRANCH
HERMAN M. HOLLOWAY SR. CAMPUS
1901 N. DUPONT HIGHWAY
NEW CASTLE, DELAWARE 19720

July 10, 2006


REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL # PSC 693R


Sealed proposals for the Clinical Care Information System for the Division of Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health (DSAMH), First Floor, Main Building,1901 North DuPont 
Highway, New Castle, DE  19720 will be received by the Delaware Health and Social 
Services, Herman M. Holloway Sr. Campus, Procurement Branch, Main Administration 
Building, South Loop, Second Floor, Room #259, 1901 North DuPont Highway, New 
Castle, Delaware 19720, until 11:00 am local time, on September 13, 2006.  At which 
time the proposals will be opened and read.  A mandatory pre-bid meeting will be held 
on July 25, 2006 at 10:00 am local time at Delaware Health and Social Services, 
Herman M. Holloway Sr. Campus, Medical Library, Springer Building, 1901 N. DuPont 
Highway, New Castle, DE 19720.  For further information concerning this RFP, please 
contact Darlene Plummer at (302) 255-9430. 

All RFP-PSCs can be obtained online at www.state.de.us/dhss/rfp/dhssrfp.htm.  A brief 
“Letter of Interest” must be submitted with your proposal.   Specifications and 
administration procedures may be obtained at the above office or phone (302) 255-9290.

NOTE TO VENDORS:  Your proposal must be signed and all information on the 
signature page completed.

If you do not intend to submit a bid and you wish to be kept on our mailing list you are 
required to return the face sheet with “NO BID” stated on the front with your company’s
name, address and signature.

IMPORTANT:	ALL PROPOSALS MUST HAVE OUR SEVEN-DIGIT PSC# NUMBER 
ON THE OUTSIDE ENVELOPE.  IF THIS NUMBER IS OMITTED YOUR PROPOSAL 
WILL IMMEDIATELY BE REJECTED.

FOR FURTHER BIDDING INFORMATION PLEASE CONTACT:

			SANDRA SKELLEY
			DELAWARE HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
			HERMAN M. HOLLOWAY SR.CAMPUS
       PROCUREMENT BRANCH
			MAIN BLD-2ND FLOOR –ROOM #259
			1901 NORTH DUPONT HIGHWAY
			NEW CASTLE, DELAWARE 19720
	PHONE:	(302) 255-9290












The contract resulting from this RFP shall be valid for the period of time as stated in the 
contract.  There will be a ninety (90) day period during which the agency may extend the 
contract period for renewal if needed.

If a bidder wishes to request a debriefing, they must submit a formal letter to the 
Procurement Administrator, Delaware Health and Social Services, Main Administration 
Building, Second Floor, (South Loop), 1901 North DuPont Highway, Herman M. 
Holloway Sr. Campus, New Castle, Delaware 19720, within ten (10) days after receipt of 
“Notice of Award”.  The letter must specify reasons for request.  










IMPORTANT:	DELIVERY INSTRUCTIONS

	IT IS THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE BIDDER TO ENSURE THAT THEIR
	PROPOSAL HAS BEEN RECEIVED BY DELAWARE HEALTH AND
	SOCIAL SERVICES BY THE DEADLINE.



Table of Contents
1	Project Overview	1
1.1	Introduction	1
1.2	Background and Purpose	1
2	DHSS Program and System Overview	4
2.1	Delaware Department of Health and Social Services (DHSS)	4
2.2	Division of Substance Abuse and Mental Health (DSAMH)	4
2.3	General System Requirements	6
2.4	DSAMH Business Requirements	12
2.4.1	Preliminary Client Processing	12
2.4.2	Care Plans/Treatment Plans	13
2.4.3	Clinical Documentation for all Caregivers	13
2.4.4	Physician Support	15
2.4.5	Administrative Support	15
2.4.6	Outcomes Measurement/Performance Measurement	17
2.5	Support/Technical Environment	19
2.5.1	Division Management Information System (MIS) Unit	19
2.5.2	Information Resource Management (IRM)	19
2.5.3	Department of Technology and Information (DTI)	20
3	State Responsibilities	21
3.1	Staffing Roles	21
3.1.1	Project Organization Chart	22
3.2	State Staff Participation	22
3.3	Resource Availability	23
3.4	Deliverable Review	23
3.5	Implementation	23
4	Contractor Responsibilities/Project Requirements	24
4.1	Staffing	24
4.1.1	On-Site Staffing Requirement	24
4.1.2	Offsite Project Work	25
4.1.3	Offshore Project Work	26
4.1.4	Project Director Requirement	26
4.1.5	Project Manager Requirement	26
4.1.6	Project Help Desk Staff Requirement	26
4.2	Project Management	26
4.3	Requirement to Comply with HIPAA Regulations and Standards	27
4.4	Requirement to Comply with Policies and Standards	27
4.5	State Architecture Requirements	28
4.6	Database Design	28
4.7	Performance	28
4.8	Degree of Customization	29
4.9	Backup and Recovery	29
4.10	Disaster Recovery	29
4.11	Specific Project Tasks	29
4.12	Deliverables	29
4.12.1	Phase 1	32
4.12.2	Phase 2	33
4.12.3	Phase 3	37
4.12.4	Phase 4	41
4.12.5	Phase 5	43
4.12.6	Phase 6	46
4.12.7	Phase 7	49
4.13	Project Expectations	49
4.13.1	Customization/Development	49
4.13.2	Site Requirements	49
4.13.3	System Testing	51
4.13.4	User Acceptance Testing (UAT)	51
4.13.5	Conversion	51
4.13.6	Training	51
4.13.7	Support Services	51
4.13.8	Maintenance Services	52
4.14	Technical Approach and Requirements	52
5	Proposal Evaluation/Contractor Selection	57
5.1	Process	57
5.2	Proposal Evaluation and Scoring	57
5.2.1	Mandatory Requirements	57
5.2.2	Technical Proposal Scoring	58
5.2.3	Business Proposal Scoring	58
5.2.4	Total Points Awarded	59
5.2.5	Final Selection	59
6	Bidder Instructions	60
6.1	Submission Information	60
6.1.1	Proposal Delivery	61
6.1.2	Closing Date	61
6.1.3	Notification of Award	61
6.1.4	Bidder Questions	62
6.1.5	Anticipated Schedule	62
6.1.6	Proposal Becomes State Property	62
6.1.7	RFP and Final Contract	63
6.1.8	Proposal and Final Contract	63
6.1.9	Modifications to Proposals	63
6.1.10	Alternative Solutions	63
6.1.11	Cost of Proposal Preparation	63
6.1.12	Mandatory Pre-bid Meeting	63
6.2	Volume I – Technical Proposal Contents	63
6.2.1	Transmittal Letter (Section A)	64
6.2.2	Required Forms (Section B)	64
6.2.3	Executive Summary (Section C)	65
6.2.4	Project Management Plan (Section D)	65
6.2.5	Project Requirements (Section E)	66
6.2.6	Staff Qualifications and Experience (Section F)	66
6.2.7	Firm Past Performance and Qualifications (Section G)	67
6.3	Volume II – Business Proposal Contents	67
6.3.1	Project Cost Information (Section A)	67
6.3.2	Software and Hardware Information (Section B)	68
6.3.3	Corporate Stability and Resources (Section B)	68
7	Terms and Conditions	69
7.1	Contract Composition	69
7.2	Payment for Services Rendered	69
7.3	Contract Term	69
7.4	Contractor Personnel	69
7.5	DTI Requirements	70
7.6	Funding	70
7.7	Confidentiality	71
7.8	Method of Payment:	71
8	Appendices	72




1	Project Overview

1.1	Introduction 
This is a Request for Proposal (RFP) for a Clinical Care Information System (CCIS), 
issued by the Division of Substance Abuse and Mental Health (the Division).

The goals are to consolidate currently automated clinical processes and to automate 
those which are currently manual.  DHSS seeks an established behavioral health 
information system that can be adapted for its purposes while building on existing core 
functionality.  DHSS does not seek a “custom developed” solution.  A web based, 
flexible system is preferred.

Flexible means that CCIS be sufficiently parameterized that State staff can make 
modifications to table-driven information (i.e. updating lists of valid values) without 
necessarily involving programming staff.  It can include OEM available API routines.
1.2	Background and Purpose 
There are nine mandatory business processes, which must be automated.  These are 
enrollment & eligibility, admissions & registration, client assessment, treatment planning, 
clinical documentation, pharmacy/pharmacy interface, order entry, charge capture, and 
reporting.  Automation of many additional processes is desired and is described in detail 
later in the RFP.  Included in the project are the main state run programs, Delaware 
Psychiatric Center (DPC), the Community Mental Health Center with five (5) sites, the 
Treatment Access Center (TASC) program with three (3) sites, and the Ellendale Detox 
program.  Also to be included are DSAMH’s contractual Substance Abuse programs run 
by non-profit corporations who are interested in using CCIS.  The DSAMH treatment 
system is further described in section 2.2 of the RFP.

DSAMH operates many “stand alone” software systems serving particular needs for the 
Division.  It is DSAMH’s goal that the CCIS system replaces as many of these “stand 
alone” systems as possible, to provide a seamless tool for both clinical and 
administrative staff.  While it will not be possible to eliminate all of the “stand alone” 
packages, a successful bidder will demonstrate that they can make a significant impact 
on the number of unconnected programs.  If the bidder cannot replace a particular 
system, they should describe their ability to interface with that system.  Interface means 
that data can be transferred between the CCIS and the other application.  Each interface 
must be maintainable and modifiable by DHSS IRM personnel. All interfaces must use 
industry standard methods like HL7. Additional information about required interfaces is 
described below.

Vendor proposals need to address their approach to replacing or interfacing the DSAMH 
“stand alone” systems, which are listed below.

*	PMIS (Patient Management Information System) - The PMIS system maintains 
client census information, including admissions, transfers, absences, discharges and 
readmissions, at Delaware Psychiatric Center. The system includes a module used 
by other psychiatric hospitals within the state to capture data on committed clients 
and a module to provide nursing assessments.  Another module exports information 
for the Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) 
ORYX performance measurement system. PMIS is a client server system with SQL 
Server as the database.
PMIS does not support eligibility determinations.  Administrative and clinical staff (the 
physicians) determine eligibility for DPC based on data collection and a psychiatric 
assessment if the client comes on site.  The psychiatrist has the ultimate decision 
regarding a client’s admission to DPC.
*	CIM Query/ DAMART - One of the key systems used by the Division’s Management 
Information System (MIS) unit to perform its tasks is DAMART.  DAMART is a 
repository for data from both state and contractual programs.  It includes consumer 
admission and discharge data collected for each treatment episode, service data, 
pharmacy data, and Medicaid eligibility data, which is imported each month.  
DAMART also contains “lock down” tables that are created for particular time 
periods, such as a state fiscal year, and are then used for routine and ad hoc 
reporting for that particular time period.  The database is MS SQL Server 7.0 and MS 
Access 2003 is the primary query tool.  The database includes approximately 
144,000 DSAMH funded episodes of care and 2,900,000 service records.
*	Drug Evaluation Network System [Addiction Severity Index (ASI) software 
provided by the Treatment Research Institute] - This software is used throughout 
the DSAMH Substance Abuse treatment system to complete an Addiction Severity 
Index (ASI).  The software is a stand-alone product and does not provide for 
networking or sharing information between providers or staff.  Clinical staff 
appreciates the software and the narrative report generated by the software after 
completion of the ASI is a popular feature.
*	Level of Care Utilization Software (LOCUS) software provided by Deerfield 
Software of Erie Pennsylvania - LOCUS is a key assessment used throughout the 
DSAMH Mental Health treatment system to make level of care determinations.  The 
system is a web-based system used by both state and contractual staff.  
Assessments and report findings can be shared within a provider and across 
providers based on access rights.
*	SuperScript Pharmacy Software by Development Analysis Associates, Inc. (DAA) 
used in the CMHC pharmacy - The pharmacy serves consumers throughout the 
state Community Mental Health Center (CMHC) system if clients can’t use a private 
pharmacy.  Prescriptions are filled from a central location and distributed to six (6) 
sites by courier.  The software system is used by 2 pharmacy staff at a time to fill 
prescriptions and runs on a single PC with a “share” allowing a second PC to access 
the program at the same time.  An integrated pharmacy module is required.  The 
ability to bill Medicare Part D is required.
*	QS/1 Pharmacy Software - Owens Pharmacy (Cardinal) use the QS/1 package in 
the Delaware Psychiatric Center pharmacy.  QS/1 is a client server based full 
featured pharmacy package and was recently purchased and installed to take 
advantage of its ability to bill Medicare Part D.  An integrated pharmacy module is 
required.  The ability to bill Medicare Part D is required.
*	ADL Systems, Inc. Patient Accounting, Patient Trust, and MDS - This system 
provides three key functions for DPC, patient accounting, patient trust, and the 
Minimum Data Set (MDS) in the long-term care unit.  It is client server system 
operated over the wide area network using a proprietary database system.  It does 
not interface with the PMIS system, so a separate Admission, Discharge and 
Transfer (ADT) system must be maintained in each system.  If patient accounting, 
patient trust, and MDS are not part of the proposed solution an interface will be 
required.




2	DHSS Program and System Overview
2.1	Delaware Department of Health and Social Services (DHSS)
The mission of DHSS is to improve the quality of life for Delaware's citizens by 
promoting health and well-being, fostering self-sufficiency, and protecting vulnerable 
populations.  DHSS is comprised of twelve divisions as follows:

*	Division of Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
*	Division of Child Support Enforcement 
*	Division of Long Term Care Resident Protection
*	Division of Management Services 
*	Division of Developmental Disabilities Services
*	Division of Public Health 
*	Division of Services for Aging and Adults with Physical Disabilities 
*	Division of Social Services 
*	Division of Medicaid and Medical Assistance
*	Division of State Service Centers
*	Division for the Visually Impaired 
*	Office of the Chief Medical Examiner
2.2	Division of Substance Abuse and Mental Health (DSAMH)
The Division is the single State Agency responsible for Mental Health and Substance 
Abuse services. As such, the Division receives Federal and State dollars for the sole 
purpose of administering mental health, substance abuse and gambling prevention and 
treatment services in Delaware.  The following components make up the Division

*	Central Office: Administration of statewide substance abuse services and mental 
health services for adults 18 years of age and older is the function of the Central 
Office. The Central Office has the following responsibilities: implementing Delaware 
Health and Social Services policy; setting mission, values, and policy within the 
Division; planning and allocating resources and developing services; managing State 
and Federal inter-governmental relations; managing the delivery system; and 
managing the flow of consumers with serious mental health illness and substance 
abuse disorders into long term community support programs. 
 
The Central Office includes the following sections: Administrative Services (MIS, 
Fiscal, Quality Improvement); Planning and Program Development; Human 
Resource Development and Training; Office of the Director/Deputy Director inclusive 
of the Office of Consumer Affairs. A Director of Substance Abuse Services oversees 
the substance abuse and gambling service system for the Division.

*	Delaware Psychiatric Center: The Delaware Psychiatric Center (DPC) is the single 
state psychiatric hospital. DPC operates three discrete programs: a 200-bed long-
term psychiatric hospital, a 42-bed forensic program, and a 39-bed psychiatric Long 
Term Care (LTC) nursing facility.

*	Crisis Services: These include 24/7 crisis intervention services including mobile 
intervention, crisis phone intervention, collaboration with police and Hospital 
emergency room staff in managing crisis interventions, etc. The goal of the mobile 
crisis approach is to assist in ameliorating a psychiatric crisis.

*	Substance Abuse Services: The Division operates, directly or through contracts 
with private agencies, primary prevention and treatment services throughout the 
state. Treatment services include: 
*	Outpatient evaluation and counseling 
*	Methadone maintenance
*	Case management services, including intensive multi-disciplinary teams
*	Short and long term residential programs
*	Residential detoxification services
*	The Treatment Access Center (TASC), providing targeted services and liaison 
with the Courts and criminal justice system
*	Services directed toward problem/compulsive gambling

*	Community Support Program Structure for Adults: DSAMH has developed a 
statewide system of four community support programs known as Community 
Continuum of Care Programs (CCCP). Each is dedicated to meeting the multiple 
needs of adults with severe and persistent mental illness. These programs serve 
between 250 and 400 individuals and operate with a high degree of resource control 
and clinical autonomy. Services are delivered via a team approach are tailored to the 
individual's need and are designed to be flexible as the person's needs change. The 
CCCPs are based on several Evidence Based Practices including the Program of 
Assertive Community Treatment model, Co-occurring Treatment Approach, 
Supportive Employment models and medication treatment algorithms.  
 
Four Community Mental Health Clinics, located in Wilmington, Newark, Dover and 
Georgetown, provide outpatient mental health treatment services throughout the 
state. Services include: short-term counseling; psychiatric and supportive counseling; 
crisis intervention; limited case management; and medication administration and 
monitoring.  
 
There are three day programs operating in Delaware. One program, serving 
consumers in New Castle County and two programs serving consumers in Kent and 
Sussex Counties, provide facility-based rehabilitative services in a group format.  
 
Twenty-four hour supervised residences (group homes) are organized as self-
contained programs. There are fourteen 24-hour supervised group residences (ten in 
New Castle County, one in Kent County and three in Sussex County), each ranging 
in capacity from seven to ten residents. 
 
Four of the group homes, referred to as the Meadows program, are located in 
buildings on a DHSS campus in southern New Castle County. The Meadows 
program is specifically designed to serve consumers, 55 years of age and older.

DSAMH’s mission is to improve the quality of life for adults living with mental illness, 
alcoholism, drug addiction, or gambling addiction by:
*	Promoting health and well-being;
*	Fostering self sufficiency;
*	Protecting those at risk. 

The Division is able to achieve this mission by providing publicly-funded treatment, 
education, prevention, and advocacy for its clients to ensure they receive requisite care. 

The treatment units operated directly by the Division of Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health (DSAMH) are DPC, Ellendale Detox, TASC, and the CMHC clinics and Mobile 
Crisis Unit.  The other treatment units are operated by contractors.

DHSS receives data from its existing internal system as well as data from contractual 
providers.  Data from contractual providers includes consumer, service summary, 
survey, and invoice data.  Most data is submitted monthly, the requirement is within 10 
business days after the end of the reporting month.  Improving data transmission to “real 
time” or “close to real time” is a goal of the CCIS project.


2.3	General System Requirements
*	There is extensive information about behavioral health “Best Practices” and 
“Evidence-based Practices” available.  The trend towards these practices is evolving 
rapidly.  Vendors should describe their capability to keep up with these trends.  
Some basic definitions follow.

Supported Housing:
Services to assist individuals in finding and maintaining appropriate housing 
arrangements. This activity is premised upon the idea that certain clients are able 
to live independently in the community only if they have support staff for 
monitoring and/or assisting with residential responsibilities. These staff assist 
clients to select, obtain, and maintain safe, decent, affordable housing and 
maintain a link to other essential services provided within the community. The 
objective of supported housing is to help obtain and maintain an independent 
living situation. Supported Housing is a specific program model in which a 
consumer lives in a house, apartment or similar setting, alone or with others, and 
has considerable responsibility for residential maintenance but receives periodic 
visits from mental health staff or family for the purpose of monitoring and/or 
assisting with residential responsibilities, criteria identified for supported housing 
programs include:  housing choice, functional separation of housing from service 
provision, affordability, integration (with persons who do not have mental illness), 
right to tenure, service choice, service individualization and service availability.

Supported Employment:
Mental Health Supported Employment (SE) is an evidence-based service to 
promote rehabilitation and return to productive employment for persons with 
serious mental illness’ rehabilitation and their return to productive employment.  
SE programs use a team approach for treatment, with employment specialists 
responsible for carrying out all vocational services from intake through follow-
along.  Job placements are:  community-based (i.e., not sheltered workshops, 
not onsite at SE or other treatment agency offices), competitive (i.e., jobs are not 
exclusively reserved for SE clients, but open to public), in normalized settings, 
and utilize multiple employers.  The SE team has a small client:staff ratio. SE 
contacts occur in the home, at the job site, or in the community.  The SE team is 
assertive in engaging and retaining clients in treatment, especially utilizing face-
to-face community visits, rather than phone or mail contacts.  The SE team 
consults / works with family and significant others when appropriate.  SE services 
are frequently coordinated with Vocational Rehabilitation benefits.

Assertive Community Treatment:
A team based approach to the provision of treatment, rehabilitation and support 
services. ACT/PACT models of treatment are built around a self-contained multi-
disciplinary team that serves as the fixed point of responsibility for all patient care 
for a fixed group of clients. In this approach, normally used with clients with 
severe and persistent mental illness, the treatment team typically provides all 
client services using a highly integrated approach to care. A key aspect are low 
caseloads and the availability of the services in a range of settings. The service 
is a recommended practice in the PORT study (Translating Research Into 
Practice: The Schizophrenia Patient Outcomes Research Team (PORT) 
Treatment Recommendations, Lehman, Steinwachs and Co-Investigators of 
Patient Outcomes Research Team, Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24(1):1-10, 1998) 
and is cited as a practice with strong evidence based on controlled, randomized 
effectiveness studies in the Surgeon General's report on mental health.

Family Psychoeducation:
Offered as part of an overall clinical treatment plan for individuals with mental 
illness to achieve the best possible outcome through the active involvement of 
family members in treatment and management and to alleviate the suffering of 
family members by supporting them in their efforts to aid the recovery of their 
loved ones.  Family Psychoeducation programs may be either multi-family or 
single-family focused.  Core characteristics of family Psychoeducation programs 
include the provision of emotional support, education, resources during periods 
of crisis, and problem-solving skills.

Integrated Treatment for Co-occurring Disorders:
Dual diagnosis treatments combine or integrate mental health and substance 
abuse interventions at the level of the clinical encounter. Hence, integrated 
treatment means that the same clinicians or teams of clinicians, working in one 
setting, provide appropriate mental health and substance abuse interventions in 
a coordinated fashion. In other words, the caregivers take responsibility for 
combining the interventions into one coherent package. For the individual with a 
dual diagnosis, the services appear seamless, with a consistent approach, 
philosophy, and set of recommendations. The need to negotiate with separate 
clinical teams, programs, or systems disappears. The goal of dual diagnosis 
interventions is recovery from two serious illnesses.

Illness Management / Recovery:
Includes a broad range of health, lifestyle, and self-assessment and treatment 
behaviors by the individual with mental illness, often with the assistance and 
support of others, so they are able to take care of themselves, manage 
symptoms, and learn ways to cope better with their illness.  Self management 
includes psycho education, behavioral tailoring, early warning sign recognition, 
coping strategies, social skills training, and cognitive behavioral treatment.

*	Delaware recently released an RFP for the Delaware Health Information Network 
(DHIN).  The DHIN project addresses “results delivery” as one of its features.  
Vendors responding to the CCIS RFP should address the capability of their proposed 
system to take advantage of the “results delivery” feature of the new DHIN system 
and other features of DHIN that relate to the CCIS project.  More information about 
the DHIN can be obtained at http://www.dhin.org/default.cfm.
*	At this time DHSS does not envision personnel using the CCIS from home.  It would 
be beneficial if staff could use the system from remote locations, such as a prison 
while they are doing a client assessment.  Also, contractual treatment providers 
could access the system from their offices to complete a client assessment or send 
information to the Care Management Unit (the Enrollment and Eligibility Unit).
*	Turnover in the DHSS programs is moderate.  DHSS anticipates that most users will 
become proficient with 1 to 3 days of training in the CCIS system.  “Power” users and 
trainers may require several days of additional training.  Length of training time 
required for each of the mandatory business functions will depend, in part, in the 
ease of use of the system selected and can’t be predicted at this time.
*	Staff will have to be trained at one level or another.  The following chart breaks out 
the staff by categories.
Staff Category
# of Staff


Psychiatrists and Physicians
25
Psychologists
15
Social Workers & Case Managers
95
Nurses
105
Nursing Assistants
170
Other Clinical Staff
55
Clerical Staff
55
Administrators
45


Total
565
*	Quality improvement and performance measurement are critical functions of the 
CCIS.  Part of this is described in the mandatory “Reporting” business function 
described in Section 4.12.3 in the description of Deliverable # 10.  The CCIS will be a 
prime source of data for the clients, services and outcomes associated with the 
treatment system.  The more reporting, performance measurement and quality 
improvement can be integrated into the CCIS the better.  DSAMH expects that it will 
not have to give up any of its current access to data, query capability, and report 
generation ability with the implementation of the CCIS system.

In preparing a response to this RFP, vendors should note the following:

*	DSAMH wants to explore all potential options for the new CCIS.  Options include 
commercial vendors, public domain vendors, open source vendors, and vendors 
offering combined solutions.  However, DSAMH is not interested in a totally 
custom development, and therefore is not interested in any vendor proposing to 
develop a Substance Abuse and Mental Health system.  
*	DSAMH is interested in proposals based on solutions developed and implemented in 
other governmental agencies.  

The following chart provides estimates of total DHSS employees and staffing contractors 
who will access the new system.  It is premature to estimate the number of SA providers 
and their employees and contractors who will take advantage of CCIS.

Mandatory Business Processes
DHSS employees & contractual employees 
(estimated total number of users)


Enrollment & Eligibility 
30
Admission & Registration
30
Client Assessment
400
Treatment/Care Planning
400
Clinical Documentation
400
Pharmacy
15
Order Entry
40
Charge Capture
5
Reporting
200

The number of clients served by DHSS and agency staff by location and by time are 
summarized in a DSAMH report called “DSAMH at a Glance,” which is available on the 
DSAMH web site.  A section of this report is provided below.  DSAMH services are 
highlighted in blue.  Contractual providers are not highlighted.  The state operated SA 
Detox program serves roughly 1/3 of the total Detox clients served.  DSAMH serves 
approximately 13,311 unduplicated consumers in state and contractual programs per 
year.

Program Type
EOT FY 05
Admission
s
EOY 6/30/05
EOY % of Total
DPC
584
354
221
3.3%
Meadow Wood
403
369
29
0.4%
Rockford
231
213
25
0.4%
St. Jones
208
203
1
0.0%
CMH Inpatient Subtotal
842
785
55
 
MH CCCP
1,413
195
1,245
18.9%
MH GH
146
25
122
1.8%
CMHC – Psyc & Supp.
1,473
297
1,145
17.3%
CMHC – Comm. Counsel.
925
169
590
8.9%
CMH Subtotal
3,957
686
3,102
 
SA Detox
2,726
2,694
33
0.5%
SA OP
7,036
4,488
2,805
42.4%
SA ICM, Day Treatment
489
345
175
2.6%
SA Residential 
1,065
870
229
3.5%
SA Transitional Housing
83
83
1
0.0%
SA Subtotal
11,399
8,480
3,243
 
GRAND TOTAL
16,782
10,305
6,621
100.0%
  
EOT = Episodes of Treatment
EOY = End of Year
CMHC = Community Mental Health Center
DPC = Delaware Psychiatric Center

DSAMH operates two residential units, which are further described below.

Program
Licensed Capacity
Operational 
Capacity
Average Occupancy 
Rate (%)
Delaware 
Psychiatric Center
381
281
83%
Ellendale Detox 
Center
20
20
83%


The following chart describes the daily volume of transactions for each mandatory 
business requirement.  DHSS does not expect any growth over the next one, two or five 
years.  DHSS does not have a user or traffic volume goal that it wants to mandate to the 
CCIS Contractor for this RFP.

Mandatory Business Processes
Estimated number of daily transactions


Enrollment & Eligibility 
25
Admission & Registration
30
Client Assessment
30
Treatment/Care Planning
30
Clinical Documentation
300
Pharmacy
250
Order Entry
200
Charge Capture
300
Care Management
20
Reporting
30

DSAMH currently has approximately 414 desktop and laptop computers and 
approximately 100 printers, both networked and desktop.

Additional background information about DSAMH.

Accounts Payable

       On average DSAMH processes 634 invoices per month.

On average DSAMH processes 556 checks per month. (This is a subset of 
the 634 invoices above.)

Billing/Accounts Receivable

Please note that all counts of bills, statements, and claim forms should reflect the actual 
number of **patients** being billed. If these figures include counts of **clients** being 
billed, then the actual patients on the client bills/statements/forms should be counted and 
included in these statistics.

DPC submits monthly electronic claims when processing patient billing.  DPC 
submits between 12 to 20 Medicare Part A claims, between 130 to 160 
Medicare Part B claims and between 7 to 10 Long Term Care Medicaid 
claims, monthly.  
       
DPC sends out approximately 800 Patient billing statements monthly.
       
DPC prints out between 10 to 20 paper claim forms to submit to Private 
Insurances monthly.
       
DPC has approximately 15,000 inactive accounts in its current billing system.  

Pharmacy

       Complete approximately 155 inpatient medication orders per day.

       Complete approximately 100 outpatient scripts per day.

       No IVs are done in either pharmacy.


Inpatient/Residential Populations Served

       Approximate number of Clients admitted during SFY 
       DPC		- 355
       Ellendale Detox	- 860

       Approximate number of Clients active at end of SFY 
   DPC		- 230
       Ellendale Detox	- 17

Outpatient Program Populations Served:

       Approximate Numbers admitted per during SFY
       TASC	- 1,600 admitted, 1600 active at any given time
       CMHC	- 466 admitted, 1,735 active at any given time

Total # of programs offered  (Approximate Numbers)
       TASC	-  three sites across state
       CMHC	-  five sites across state

       Approximate numbers of services provided per SFY
       TASC	- 	53,750 
       CMHC	-	28,910

Total # of Case Managers: (Approximate Numbers)
       TASC				17
CMHC – All Clinical Staff	-	69 (this includes part time and contractual 
staff)

Total # of clients per Case Manager (Approximate Numbers)
       TASC		-	95
       CMHC		-	25 
       
The DSAMH total annual operating budget is $ 90.4 million.

2.4	DSAMH Business Requirements
The CCIS must support all services provided by DSAMH and its mission.  The ideal 
CCIS system will equally support the State facilities and substance abuse contractual 
providers by providing the following business functionality:
2.4.1	Preliminary Client Processing  
A. Enrollment and Eligibility
*	An automated process to include the ability to identify and/or create a 
Master Client Index (MCI) number from all current and future points of 
service for all authorized MCI users.
*	Eliminate or substantially reduce the paper-based and manual processes 
currently associated with this client assessment.
*	The ability to electronically convey client information to all applicable 
departments and providers in a secure and timely manner.
*	Integrate all sources of tracking data into one central resource and 
provide access to approved providers.
B. Admissions and Registration 
*	Integrate where applicable, with the various sources of information 
necessary for client admissions and registration including, but not limited 
to, current basic demographics from PMIS (Patient Management 
Information System), Consumer Reporting Forms and verification of 
Medicaid insurance through the MMIS (Medicaid Management 
Information System).
*	Automate the admission services for the 281 DPC beds. 
*	Expedite 24x7 psychiatric evaluations for all client referrals through 
automation and integration of data sources providing consistent and 
accurate information. 
*	Standardize all intake forms and processes to eliminate repetitive 
collection of data for the same clients and automate the process of 
information sharing across facilities.
C. Client Scheduling
*	Implement an enterprise-wide model and system for client scheduling.  
This would include calendar sharing, scheduling, and multiple points of 
input.
*	Eliminate paper appointment books
*	Interface with Microsoft Outlook Calendar to put appointments in staff 
Outlook Calendars.  
*	Scheduling functions should be seamless to users when scheduling 
across departments and facilities.
*	Improve resource and facility scheduling, for internal management 
functioning.
*	Automatic integration with client data eliminating redundant and duplicate 
scheduling tasks.
*	Provide automated reminders and updates to clients and the staff 
reducing manual intervention.
D. Client Assessment
*	Provide a system of integrated and consistent client assessments across 
all facilities, State and contractual.
*	Automate all client assessments for data input, storage, and retrieval.
*	Centralize all client assessment data and provide secure access for all 
applicable provider personnel.
*	Each client will have a standard baseline of information to be used for 
new and subsequent assessments.
*	Evidence-based Practices of Illness Management and Recovery (IMR) 
should be integral to the client assessment practice.
*	Incorporate and expand the use of the Addiction Severity Index (ASI) and 
Level of Care Utilization System (LOCUS) as a best practice initiative 
across all facilities, State and contractual.
E. Minimum Data Set (MDS) for LTC Clients 
*	All necessary information will be captured at the actual time and point of 
delivery. 
*	Provide the MDS coordinators with electronic means of entering and 
accessing assessments eliminating manual, time consuming data input.
*	MDS should be interfaced as a part of the client care planning module.
*	Electronic submission of data to all State and Federal agencies in a timely 
and accurate manner.
2.4.2	Care Plans/Treatment Plans 
A. Treatment Planning
*	Ensure treatment plans are linked to all client assessments to make 
certain the client receives the essential care and treatment.
*	Maintain a data library of treatment goals, objectives, and problems.
*	Automate and utilize integrated Treatment Management processes 
eliminating paper documents and their associated manual processes.
*	Centralize all client care and treatment data and provide secure access 
for all authorized provider personnel.
*	Treatment plans will be interdisciplinary. 
*	Incorporate the use of the EBP Medication Management Approaches in 
Psychiatry (MedMAP) as best practice, where needed.
2.4.3	Clinical Documentation for all Caregivers
A. Clinical Care Delivery
*	Create and utilize common care delivery processes and electronic chart 
to ensure consistency and reduce or eliminate paper-based manual 
practices.
*	Provide easy and secure dissemination of information.
*	Apply structured and standard charting techniques in all programs.
*	Introduce and employ common interdisciplinary processes and forms.
*	Ensure therapy and rehabilitation plans are linked to all client 
assessments to make certain the client receives the essential care and 
treatment required.
*	Maintain an electronic history of treatment goals, objectives, and 
problems to be utilized as part of the client’s clinical history.
*	Automate physician’s orders eliminating paper documents and their 
associated manual processes,
*	Centralize all client care and treatment data and provide secure access 
for all applicable provider personnel.
*	Therapy treatment plans will be interdisciplinary and will include 
recreational, occupational, vocational, pastoral, art, music, and library 
services. 
*	Incorporate the use of the Co-occurring Disorders:  Integrated Dual 
Diagnosis Treatment.
*	Utilize structured and standard charting techniques. 
*	Implement automated electronic process for social assessments, 
counseling, education, group treatment, planning, and employee services.
*	Implement an automated electronic process for discharge plans for 
physician review and documented client history.
B. Clinical Documentation
*	Implement electronic medical records eliminating hard-to-read paper 
documents, where possible.
*	Implement common standard interdisciplinary processes and forms.
*	Apply structured and standard charting techniques in all programs.
*	Create and maintain a common electronic shared library of goals, 
objectives, and problems. 
C. Pharmacy / Pharmacy Interface
*	Integrate with other processes in treatment and care delivery for clients.
*	Access to all pertinent client information including demographics and 
medical history. 
*	Ability to interface with external systems if integration into the treatment 
and care system is not possible.
*	Secure, electronic access to the pharmacy system eliminating the need 
for written orders and manual ordering methods.
*	Interface with DSAMH’s billing system for Medicare Part D billing, client 
billing, and drug rebate claims. 
*	Access to multiple electronic systems and devices for streamlined 
ordering. 
D. Radiology
*	Interface with other processes in treatment and care delivery.
*	Access to all pertinent client information including demographics and 
medical history.
*	Secure, electronic access to the ordering system eliminating the need for 
written orders and manual ordering methods.
*	Automated access to storage of radiology results and recommendations.
E. Laboratory
*	Interface with other processes in treatment and care delivery.
*	Access to all pertinent client information including demographics and 
medical history.
*	Secure, electronic access to the ordering system eliminating the need for 
written orders and manual ordering methods.
*	Automated access to and storage of laboratory results and 
recommendations.
F. Case Management
*	 Deploy a streamlined, consistent process that utilizes all of the current 
and historical electronic client data providing effective and efficient client 
case management.
*	Support the use of emerging evidence-based practices.
*	Utilize structured and standard charting techniques.
*	Investigate and Implement ACT, IMR, and Outcome, Monitoring, 
Assessment and Reporting, where practical.
G. Clinical Support
*	Interface and automate the processing and reporting requirements across 
clinical support facilities.
*	Interface or replace the numerous standalone databases and 
spreadsheets used for Medical Records, Performance Improvement, 
Quality Assurance, Risk Management and Utilization Review.  
Replacement is preferred.
*	Implement electronic documentation for all issue tracking, medication 
errors, abuse, neglect, etc. for compliance reporting and surveys. 
Recipients of compliance data include, but are not limited to, Local, State 
and Federal agencies such as Joint Commission on Accreditation of 
Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) ORYX and Medicare.
*	Implement the use of IMR, ASI, LOCUS, and MedMAP, where feasible.
2.4.4	Physician Support 
A. Order Entry
*	Implement an integrated, electronic order entry system across all 
functions and facilities.
*	Gain efficiency and reduction of client risk through automated order entry, 
reporting, and tracking.
*	Improve operational productivity throughout the DSAMH organization.
B. Results Reporting
*	Utilize a standard vehicle for notification of order status, completed 
results, and communication of results through an electronic system.
2.4.5	Administrative Support 
A. Charge Capture
*	Implement an automated electronic charge capture process to address 
and capture all charges.
*	Interface with the patient accounting system, if a patient accounting 
module is not provided.
B. Staff Scheduling
*	Implement an enterprise-wide model and system for staff scheduling.  
This would include calendar sharing, scheduling, and multiple points of 
input.
*	Eliminate paper appointment books and interface with Microsoft Outlook 
calendar.
*	Integrate client and staff scheduling to avoid scheduling conflicts.
C. Patient Accounting/Patient Trust
*	Implement an integrated billing module that performs all of the billing and 
patient trust functions necessary for DPC inpatient, CMH outpatient 
programs, and substance abuse treatment programs.  
*	Interface with the DHSS current patient accounting/patient trust system if 
the proposed solution cannot provide this module.
D. Care Management - Besides being a provider of services, DSAMH also 
manages treatment provided by contractual providers.  In some cases this is 
done on an episode by episode basis (such as a short term inpatient hospital 
stay) and in other cases care is managed at the level of care level.  In all cases, 
providers submit requests for authorization of care.  Documentation is provided.  
Specific forms are used, such as are available on the DSAMH web site.  
(http://www.dhss.state.de.us/dhss/dsamh/cpfrms.html).  Most communication, at 
present, occurs via mail and fax.
*	Care Management is a optional business process.  The requirements are 
described in more detail in Deliverable 11.  At its most basic level, Care 
Management staff will enter key data into the system from documents 
submitted by the treatment providers and documents will then be printed 
from the system to be sent back to the treatment providers.  At a more 
sophisticated level, treatment providers will be able to interact (send and 
receive) information regarding care that is being requested and 
authorized or denied.  CCIS vendors should describe their capability to 
manage this information.  Although not specifically described in 
Deliverable 11, DHSS business staff needs access to care management 
documentation when they review claims submitted by the treatment 
providers.
*	Support the management of care functions performed by DSAMH staff, in 
particular the Eligibility and Enrollment Unit (EEU), for consumers who 
are carved out to DSAMH from a Medicaid Managed Care Organization 
(MCO), who need higher levels of care (such as residential substance 
abuse services or Community Continuum of Care Programs (CCCP), or 
who are committed involuntarily to a psychiatric hospital.  
*	Assist DSAMH staff to track clients through the referral and authorization 
process from start to finish.
*	Provide a tool for communicating with referral sources and providers 
throughout the care management process.
E. Substance Abuse (SA) Contractual Programs 
*	Contractual providers provide most of the DSAMH Substance Abuse (SA) 
treatment system.  The one exception is the Ellendale Detoxification 
Center that is operated by DSAMH employees.  
*	The SA contractual providers have had difficulty developing their own 
information systems that are comprehensive and provide for all of their 
automation needs.  
*	DHSS would like the option to provide solutions for DSAMH contractors in 
addition to the “core” system for DSAMH program state staff and 
administrators.  
*	Include the capability to interface key data collected by the SA providers 
with the “core” system operated by DSAMH with required data for client 
admissions, discharges, status changes, etc.  A close to “real time” 
exchange of data between the SA Providers and DSAMH is required.
*	Methadone maintenance is provided by DHSS contractors, DSAMH does 
not operate a methadone maintenance program directly.  This is likely a 
feature that DHSS Substance Abuse (SA) contractors will be interested 
in.

2.4.6	Outcomes Measurement/Performance Measurement
A. Reporting
*	Online reports, scorecards, and other tools to assess quality of care 
delivery, as well as to focus on continuous quality improvement.
*	Investigate the use of the Outcome Monitoring, Assessment and 
Reporting as an EBP.  Examples include the “Kansas Consumer Survey” 
and the “Quality of Life Assessment”.
*	Implement a Data Warehouse strategy to expand available data 
elements.
*	Implement appropriate Data Warehouse or DataMart and reporting tools 
to maximize use of warehoused information.  Appropriate reporting tools 
are those that are powerful and easy to use.  DSAMH currently uses MS 
Access for most queries and MS Excel and MS Word for final report 
display.  Other tools used are SPSS and Crystal Reports.  Many reports 
are distributed electronically in Adobe format or MS Snapshot Viewer.  
DHSS anticipates that its reporting capabilities will be dramatically 
enhanced with the new CCIS.  OLAP capability and web based query 
tools would be a plus.

The chart on the following page indicates which business functions are mandatory.  
Proposals which do not address these mandatory functions will not be evaluated.  
The chart also identifies which areas within DSAMH each function applies.



Business 
Process 
Area
Business 
Process 
ID#
Business Process
High Level Priority
DPC
Community 
Mental 
Health
CMH 
Contractors
TASC
Detox
SA 
Contractors
Preliminary Client Processing 








1
Enrollment & Eligibility
Mandatory
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

2
Admission & Registration
Mandatory
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

3
Client Scheduling
Optional
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

4
Client Assessment
Mandatory
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

5
Minimum Data Set-LTC Clients
Optional
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Care Plans/Treatment Plans








6
Treatment/Care Planning
Mandatory
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Clinical Documentation for all Caregivers








7
Clinical Care Delivery
Optional
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

8
Clinical Documentation
Mandatory
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

9
Pharmacy/Pharmacy Interface
Mandatory
Yes
Yes
Some
No
Some
Some

10
Radiology
Optional
Yes
No
No
No
No
No

11
Laboratory
Optional
Yes
Yes
Yes
Some
Some
Some

12
Case Management
Optional
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

13
Clinical Support
Optional
Yes
Yes
Yes
Some
Yes
Some
Physician Support 








14
Order Entry
Mandatory
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

15
Results Reporting
Optional
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Administration Support








16
Charge Capture
Mandatory
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

17
Patient Accounting/Patient Trust
Optional
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

18
Care Management
Optional
No
Yes
No
No
No
No

19
SA Contractual Programs
Optional
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Outcome Measurement/Performance Measurement








20
Reporting
Mandatory
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes


2.5	Support/Technical Environment
The three groups responsible for the development and operation of the automated 
systems that support the Division are described below. The Division and IRM (see 
below) will appoint co-Project Directors. These individuals will be responsible for 
monitoring project progress and will have final authority to approve/disapprove project 
deliverables and payments. IRM will serve as the technical liaison with DTI (see below). 
The selected contractor will coordinate efforts for this project with the Division and IRM 
co-Project Directors.
2.5.1	Division Management Information System (MIS) Unit
DSAMH operates an MIS unit to manage the collection, storage, and reporting of 
information critical to the smooth and efficient operation of the Division.  In addition to 
data management, this unit has responsibility for first level PC and network support, 
billing, data collection, Internet site development and maintenance, performance 
measurement, and routine and ad hoc reporting.  There are seventeen positions in this 
unit ranging from administrative specialists to the Manager of Computer and Application 
Support.

The MIS unit manages several grants and contracts with Federal Agencies.  These 
grants and contracts are either infrastructure development initiatives or mechanisms to 
submit data directly to the federal government’s contractors.  Several key initiatives are 
the Mental Health Statistics Improvement Program (MHSIP), the Uniform Reporting 
System (URS), the Treatment Episode Data Set (TEDS), and other initiatives under the 
Drug and Alcohol Services Information System (DASIS).  The current priority for the 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) is the National 
Outcome Measures or (NOMS).  

As a top priority of SAMHSA, the NOMS have been driving the Federal agenda for 
performance measurement for several years.  While Mental Health and Substance 
Abuse Treatment share the same performance domains, the performance measures for 
both are different.  More information about the NOMS can be obtained from the 
SAMHSA web site included in Appendix D.
2.5.2	Information Resource Management (IRM)
The IRM unit is responsible for providing DHSS divisions with direct programming 
support of automated systems, as well as consulting support and advice on automated 
systems software and development.  IRM consists of Applications Development, 
Technology Planning, Base Technology, Telecommunications and a HelpDesk support 
group. For this project, IRM will provide project staff for consulting support and advice to 
ensure that technical questions and issues are resolved quickly.
2.5.3	Department of Technology and Information (DTI)
DTI is a separate cabinet level agency responsible for operating the State of Delaware’s 
mainframe computer operations, wide area data network and setting statewide IT policy 
and standards. DTI as a separate state agency does not fall under the authority of 
DHSS.  However, DTI is responsible for supplying mainframe and Wide Area Network 
(WAN) systems support to DHSS as well as other state agencies. Additionally, DTI 
provides 24x7 data center operations support. DTI provides state agencies with 
technical consultant services. DTI will work closely through IRM on this project to ensure 
that State IT standards are followed.



3	State Responsibilities

The following are State responsibilities under this RFP.  Outlined in the following 
subsections are such areas as project staffing, project management, available 
resources, and system testing and implementation (if applicable). There is an emphasis 
on the limitation of State staff time for this project and their role in the 
customization/development process.
3.1	Staffing Roles
The Division and IRM will appoint co-Project Directors. These co-Project Directors will 
serve to manage the contractor during this project. All project deliverables will be 
approved by signature of both the Division and IRM project directors. The Division 
Project Director will serve as the overall business project director, while the IRM Project 
Director will serve as the technical project director. 

The Division Project Director will serve as primary coordinator to ensure that Joint 
Application Design (JAD) sessions take place with the appropriate subject matter 
experts (SME), that project documents and deliverables are thoroughly reviewed and 
that approval takes place within agreed upon timeframes. This individual is also 
responsible for scheduling and coordinating User Acceptance Testing (UAT), when 
appropriate.  The Division Project Director will coordinate with other divisions and State 
agencies for their input as needed. These staff will serve primarily as subject matter 
experts on relevant Division applications and related systems, and will participate in 
meetings and deliverable review as necessary.

The IRM Project Director will serve as primary technical liaison to ensure that contractor 
and State technical staff work together effectively to identify current and future 
technology considerations and make key technology decisions. The IRM Project Director 
will serve as the primary liaison with DTI staff to gather State level input as needed.  

The Project Directors will report to a Project Steering Committee made up of 
representative managers from the Division and IRM. This Committee will meet monthly 
to review project status, progress and issues. The Project Steering Committee will report 
to the Executive Sponsors. The Executive Sponsors will be representatives from DHSS, 
DTI and the Division. They will meet at least bi-monthly to discuss overall project status, 
progress and issues, project management, funding, staffing, sponsor issues, stakeholder 
participation and tasks planned for the upcoming quarter.


3.1.1	Project Organization Chart

The following organization chart outlines the proposed management structure for this 
project.
 
3.2	State Staff Participation

The Division Project Director will be assigned to work on this project full time. Additional 
State staff participation is as assigned and is in addition to their primary responsibilities.  
State staff normally work 7.5 hour days from 8:00 AM – 4:30 PM, although some staff 
flex their schedules. No State staff will be available for data cleanup or meta-data 
definition.  State staff will be available to consult with the CCIS vendor on the data 
needing to be cleaned up for the conversion. Divisional SME’s can also serve to advise 
the contractor on these topics. No State technical staff will be assigned to this project to 
assist in the coding of the system. State technical staff will attend JAD sessions as 
assigned. It is important to note that documentation on the existing systems may be 
missing, incomplete, out of date or in error. Divisional staff will be responsible for user 
acceptance testing. The Division will be responsible for assigning a primary and backup 
division liaison and knowledgeable subject matter experts for the duration of JAD 
sessions related to their areas of expertise. These assignments will be sent to the 
Division Project Director prior to the start of the JAD sessions. Attendance at these 
sessions is mandatory for assigned staff. These same subject matter experts along with 
other staff will be assigned to participate during UAT for their areas of expertise. 
Adequate divisional staff participation is critical. 

DHSS is very aware that slippage on the part of the State will delay the project.  This is 
costly to the CCIS vendor, so completion of DHSS’s responsibilities will be a priority.  
Regular meetings with the CCIS vendor will raise any potential problems to the surface 
in time to address those issues, whether on the part of the CCIS vendor or on the part of 
DHSS.  The co-project directors, with support from the Executive Sponsors of the 
project, will be responsible to make sure that DHSS tasks are completed on time.  
Enthusiasm and support for this project is very high amongst the executive sponsors.

3.3	Resource Availability
During State business days, the Biggs mainframe production systems are normally 
available from 7:00 AM to 6:00 PM. On Saturday the hours are 8:00 AM to 4:30 PM.  
Production systems are taken down earlier on specific monthly dates to accommodate 
particularly heavy batch schedules. Test systems availability will be scheduled in concert 
with other development staff. DTI has mainframe systems support staff on site from 7:00 
AM to 4:30 PM. DTI Operations staff are on site 24x7. IRM applications, 
telecommunications and HelpDesk staff are on site from 8:00 AM to 4:30 PM on State 
business days. The State network is very stable and unscheduled downtime is minimal. 
Given that the network is an essential state resource, any reported problems have a very 
high priority and are dealt with immediately. Data center power is conditioned and 
outside supply fluctuations can trigger a switch to automatic local power generation 
capability. The State has audio and video-conferencing capabilities as well in specific 
on-site locations for remote meeting participation. Remote connectivity through SSL-
VPN is available for offsite work for contracted staff who must access, update or 
maintain servers and/or applications in the Biggs Data Center DMZ. Please refer to 
Appendix D for more information on the DHSS IT environment.
3.4	Deliverable Review 
It is the responsibility of the State to perform deliverable review.  For each document 
deliverable, the State will either approve the deliverable in its entirety or disapprove the 
deliverable and return with comments.  The State is also responsible for User 
Acceptance Testing on all functional aspects of the project. DTI may participate in the 
review process for certain deliverables. It is the responsibility of the State to review all 
project deliverables in the agreed upon timeframe. The State will notify the bidder of any 
changes to the review schedule. Milestone invoicing and payment are contingent upon 
formal State approval. Likewise, production implementation of each module is contingent 
upon formal State approval.
3.5	Implementation
Production implementation is normally an IRM responsibility.  Depending on the solution 
selected, IRM may require participation of contractor staff.  The state will be primarily 
responsible for post implementation administration if the system resides at the Biggs 
Data Center. If ASP vendor has primary administration responsibilities.


4	Contractor Responsibilities/Project 
Requirements
The following are contractor responsibilities and project requirements under this RFP. 
Given the limitations of assigning State staff to this project, the contractor is expected to 
provide most of the expertise and provide for the full range of services during the project. 
Bidders must discuss each of these subsection requirements in detail in their proposals 
to acknowledge their responsibilities under this RFP.

Bidders must have demonstrated experience and depth in the following areas: 
*	Behavioral Health Information Systems in inpatient and outpatient settings
*	Electronic Medical Records
*	State and/or County Government Experience
*	Implementation and Project Management Experience on similar size projects
This experience is critical in ensuring project success in terms of the future direction of 
the Division’s information technology development, as well as maintaining an open 
partnership with project partners.  
4.1	Staffing 
Contractor will propose and supply resumes for the following key positions including:
*	Project Director
*	Project Manager
*	Business Analysts
*	Senior Developers
*	Technical Analysts (e.g., DBA, SE, etc.)
*	Documentation Specialists
*	Training Specialists
*	Subject Matter Experts (Behavioral Health Clinical Expertise)
The resumes will be for specific named individuals and will be in the format specified in 
Appendix E. Other positions may be proposed at the contractor’s discretion. One person 
may be proposed to fill more than one role. The contractor project manager and other 
key staff like the Business Analyst(s) will be required to be on site in New Castle, 
Delaware, during the entire project phase. 
4.1.1	On-Site Staffing Requirement 
The following key contractor staff are required to be on-site at the Biggs Data Center in 
New Castle, Delaware, as indicated below:
*	Contractor Project Director, when needed on-site
*	Contractor Project Manager (at least 80 % of the time)
*	Business Analysts, when needed on-site
*	Senior developers, when needed on-site
*	Training Specialists, when needed on-site
*	Technical analysts (e.g., DBA, SE, etc.), when needed on-site
*	Training specialists, when needed on site
*	Subject Matter Experts (Behavioral Health Clinical Expertise), when needed on-
site
The State and the key contractor staff will work very closely together on this project and 
this requires an on-site presence. It is vital for this project manager to play an active role 
on-site in the project and be visible and accessible. The State will provide office space 
including phones and network connectivity for on-site project staff. Contractor will be 
responsible for other office necessities including workstation and required software. 
4.1.2	Offsite Project Work
The State will permit project work to be done offsite, within the United States. For offsite 
work, the State requires strong management of the resources and assigned tasks; 
adequate, timely and accurate communications and completion of assigned work by 
specified deadlines. This is important to any offsite relationship. If the bidder 
organization is proposing offsite project work, the bidder must specifically address each 
of the bulleted items below in this section of the proposal. Otherwise, bidder will respond 
to this section as follows: “No offsite project work proposed.”

Note: For the purposes of this section, the bidder staff organization includes subsidiary 
contractors.

*	Provide a detailed description of work to be completed offsite along with a 
breakdown of the type of work to be provided on-site.  Quantify this by estimating for 
each of the deliverables identified in section 4.12, the percentage of work to be done 
offsite.
*	Provide an organization chart with job titles of offsite staff and their relationship to the 
bidder.
*	Provide a description of what tasks each job title is responsible for performing.
*	Clearly identify if offsite work is to be performed by bidder staff or sub-contractors.
*	For offsite subcontractor or bidder staff, please include the names and resumes of 
key staff, highlighting prior participation on similar projects. Also provide named or 
sample resumes for lower level staff. 
*	Detailed plan for managing offsite work including communication strategy to 
accommodate time differences if any. Include contingency plan for completing work 
should offsite relationship be terminated.
*	Propose a meeting schedule for project status discussions with offsite management 
staff.
*	Identify the offsite single point of contact who will serve as the project manager of 
offsite resources.  Describe how this project manager and the on-site project 
manager will interact. The State prefers that the offsite project manager be a bidder 
employee. Please refer to RFP Section 4.1 for normal bidder staffing requirements.
*	Provide a contingency plan for substituting on-site staff if offsite relationship 
becomes problematic as determined by the State.
*	Provide a description of prior bidder organization experience with use of offsite 
bidder staff or subcontractors and provide U.S. client references for that work. 
*	Provide a detailed description of proposed project manager's experience in directing 
offsite staff and/or subcontractors. 
*	Describe your understanding that the State will only provide management of this 
project and bidder resources through the on-site project manager.  All 
management/relationships with offsite resources, whether bidder staff or 
subcontractors, will be handled by the respective bidding organization.
4.1.3	Offshore Project Work
The State will not permit project work to be done offshore.
4.1.4	Project Director Requirement
The Vendor Project Director is the individual who has direct authority over the Vendor 
Project Manager and will be the responsible party if issues arise that are not resolvable 
with the Vendor Project Manager. The Director does not need to be on-site except for 
designated meetings or as requested. It is critical that a named Vendor Project Director 
with appropriate experience be proposed. 
4.1.5	Project Manager Requirement
The contractor Project Manager is normally on-site and manages the project from the 
contractor perspective and is the chief liaison for the State Project Directors. The Project 
Manager has authority to make the day-to-day project decisions from the contractor firm 
perspective. This contractor Project Manager is expected to host meetings with Division 
Subject Matter Experts (SME) to review Division business organization and functions 
along with the organization, functions and data of information systems relevant to this 
project. The contractor project manager is expected to host other important meetings 
and to assign contractor staff to those meetings as appropriate and provide an agenda 
for each meeting. Bi-weekly status meetings are required, as are monthly milestone 
meetings. Meeting minutes will be recorded by the contractor and distributed by noon 
the day prior to the next meeting. Key decisions along with Closed, Active and Pending 
issues will be included in this document as well. In their proposals, bidders must include 
a confirmation that their Project Manager will schedule status review meetings as 
described above. It is critical that a named Vendor Project Manager with prior project 
management experience be proposed.

In their proposals, bidders must include a confirmation that their Project Manager will 
schedule status review meetings on-site, at least bi-weekly, and that their Project 
Manager will provide written minutes of these meetings to the State Project Directors by 
noon the business day prior to the next meeting.
4.1.6	Project Help Desk Staff Requirement
Vendor Help Desk expertise is critical to the success of the system. Staff proposed for 
this function do not need to be dedicated exclusively to this role. They may serve a 
primary role in addition to providing Help Desk coverage. Secondary Help Desk support 
must be identified in the resume of the staff member primarily bid for another function. 
Bidder must supply at least a primary and a backup Help Desk function during the UAT, 
production Implementation and the warranty period. These staff will provide second-level 
support during State business hours to callers with system issues. The department’s 
Help Desk will provide first-level support. This generally includes resolution of issues 
such as network connectivity, application log in problems and general PC advice. The 
contractor will provide second level support. This will be more system-specific and 
require application expertise. Specific system issues may be referred to third-level 
divisional support for SME expertise.
4.2	Project Management
The contractor must be the prime contractor to develop all the deliverables required by 
this RFP. The contractor must recommend a core team to work with DHSS over the 
course of the project and must identify other resources needed. A detailed, up-to-date 
project plan must be created and updated weekly to accurately reflect project timelines 
and tasks. This project plan must include each phase of the project, clearly identifying 
the resources necessary to meet project goals. For each document deliverable, the 
contractor will first deliver for State approval a template with an outline and sample 
contents. The actual deliverable will follow the approved template. It will be the 
contractor’s responsibility to provide complete and accurate backup documentation as 
required for all document deliverables. 

The contractor is expected to employ a rapid application design methodology to speed 
customization/development.  An iterative model of testing is required which will require 
early prototypes and subsequent demonstrations of working modules to ensure that the 
product meets user specifications in terms of user interface and functionality. It will be 
the contractor’s responsibility to provide complete and accurate documentation for all 
entities in the system.  The contractor is expected to release prototypes/drafts of project 
deliverables and components for early state consideration and comment in order to 
expedite the final review process.  Software demonstrations from vendors will be 
scripted; the scripts will be distributed when the demonstrations are scheduled.
4.3	Requirement to Comply with HIPAA Regulations and Standards
The selected vendor must certify compliance with Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations and requirements as described in Department of 
Health and Human Services, Office of the Secretary, 45 CFR Parts 160, 162 and 164, as 
well as all HIPAA requirements related to privacy, security, transaction code sets (where 
applicable) and medical provider enumeration.

The selected vendor is required to customize/develop the system in accordance with 
HIPAA requirements, implement the system in accordance with HIPAA requirements 
and, where the vendor will operate and maintain the system, operate and maintain the 
system in compliance with HIPAA requirements.

In the proposal, contractor will explain their understanding of the HIPAA regulations and 
their impact on this project especially in the area of security.  
4.4	Requirement to Comply with Policies and Standards
All proposed solutions submitted in response to this RFP must be fully compatible with 
the Department of Health and Social Services’ technical environment.  This is specified 
in Appendix D via the following web links: 
*	DHSS Information Technology (IT) Standards
*	State of Delaware Web Standards 
*	DTI Executive Sponsor Reporting Standards and Change Management Standards

Vendors must also comply with DTI policies which will be distributed at the pre-bid 
meeting upon vendor signature of a non-disclosure agreement.

Vendor staff accessing State IT resources must comply with DHSS policies and 
standards, and will be required to sign the DHSS Biggs Data Center User Authorization 
Form and the Biggs Data Center Non-Disclosure Form.

All components of the proposed solution, including third party software and hardware, 
are required to adhere to the policies and standards described above, including any links 
or documents found at the above referenced web sites.  All exceptions must be 
addressed in your Technical Proposal.
4.5	State Architecture Requirements
The State prefers to have a system with a web front-end for a common user interface 
that is platform independent.  Web browser based applications are now considered the 
only acceptable platform for custom applications development at DHSS.  Additionally, in 
the purchase of any COTS system, web browser based systems will receive preferential 
treatment.  Preference will also be given to COTS systems which:
*	Use Microsoft Windows Enterprise Edition as their operating system
*	Use Microsoft Internet Information Server (IIS) as their web and application server 
software
*	Use either Microsoft SQL Server or the mainframe DB2 database for their data store 
(the Microsoft database platform is the preferred platform due to its higher availability 
and capacity)
*	Have been developed using Microsoft .NET

The State will consider 3-tiered and above systems that are hosted at a server level. The 
current mainframe supports a number of systems and available resources are limited. 
Synching mainframe online and batch schedules further restricts system operating 
hours.

Various mainframe software version upgrades are planned through 2007 to bring this 
data center up-to-date with current software releases. The State will provide up-to-date 
mainframe, server, network and security testing and implementation schedules to the 
winning bidder. Bidders are expected to take this changing technical environment into 
consideration for their analysis and recommendations.  In terms of proposal costs, 
vendor will be expected to develop total project costs that include purchase of hardware 
and software, out year hardware and software licensing, support and maintenance costs 
along with staffing projection costs.
4.6	Database Design
Vendor will need to take into consideration the design of existing table structures and 
whether they may carry forward into the solution being proposed or may have to be re-
engineered.  Quality of the current data needs to be reviewed.  Consideration will need 
to be given to ETL (Extraction, Transformation and Loading) processes for conversion 
as well as archiving, backups and disaster recovery.  The vendor may be required to 
provide a data model.
4.7	Performance
Performance of the proposed solution within the DHSS and State technical environment 
is a critical consideration. The present data center environment in terms of infrastructure, 
hardware, power, etc. needs to be reviewed. Contractor is expected to review this with 
IRM and DTI to ensure that it is sufficient. The current design and capacity of the 
network especially in terms of connectivity to the Division business sites must be 
reviewed along with service upgrade plans. Future capacity and response time needs 
must be evaluated and accepted. 
4.8	Degree of Customization
In terms of costs, vendor will be expected to account for necessary customization of 
proposed solution in order to fit Division business needs. 

In terms of customization of COTS software to meet State needs, this must not exceed 
15 %.  The State will waive ownership rights of customization features if they are made 
part of the standard product, which in fact is the State's preference.
4.9	Backup and Recovery 
DHSS requires that system data be backed up to appropriate media that can be restored 
as necessary. Contractor will be expected to review the current backup and recovery 
process and suggest scenarios where incremental backups, full backups or dataset 
reloads are appropriate.  
4.10	Disaster Recovery
DHSS has contracted with Vital Records, Inc. as the offsite media storage contractor for 
client/server and mainframe backup media. Sungard Recovery Systems is contracted as 
the client/server and mainframe cold site contractor. Disaster recovery tests are 
conducted every six months for the Biggs mainframe. Contractor is expected to review 
this process with IRM and DTI to ensure that it is sufficient  
4.11	Specific Project Tasks
Contractor will be expected to address the following requirements in their proposal in 
detail.  Emphasis is on the limited availability of State staff for the project and the 
expectation that the contractor express in detail their understanding of their 
responsibilities for each of these tasks. Contractor is expected to have primary 
responsibility for each of these project tasks. State versus contractor responsibilities 
must be delineated.

Vendor should list all project tasks that are their responsibility.  Include a detailed 
description with each.  Examples of contractor responsibilities are listed below.  This is 
not an exhaustive list.

*	Conduct and document Joint Application Design (JAD) sessions
*	Customization of the system to meet DSAMH’s requirements including forms and 
reports
*	Provision of all mandatory requirements
*	Provision of all optional requirements proposed by the contractor
*	Data conversion from existing systems
*	Master Client Index (MCI) integration
*	Development of User Documentation
*	Development of required interfaces
*	Develop Training Curriculum
*	Provide User Training
4.12	Deliverables
In Phase 1, all deliverable documentation will be initially introduced in an “Outline and 
Sample Contents” template submitted by the contractor. State staff will approve each 
template. These templates may also be subject to federal review as well. Each 
deliverable will follow their respective approved template design.

Each document deliverable must be delivered in ten (10) paper copies along with 
electronic copies sent to the two State Project Directors. Each deliverable shall be 
reviewed by DHSS and will require formal approval from DHSS prior to milestone 
approval and payment. Federal approval may also be required for certain documents as 
well. State staff time is limited on this project especially for deliverable review. The 
project plan must include sufficient time for serial deliverable review. The contractor 
must include at least ten (10) business days, per deliverable, in the project plan for State 
staff to complete a review and to document their findings. Based on the review findings, 
DHSS may grant approval, reject portions of or reject the complete document, request 
contractor revisions be made, or may state the inability to respond to the deliverable until 
a future specified date. Upon each rejection, the contractor will have five (5) business 
day periods to revise the document.  Additional three (3) business day periods shall be 
required by the State for subsequent reviews whenever revisions are requested or a 
deliverable is disapproved. Bidder will include reasonable federal timeframes in the 
project plan for those deliverables requiring federal review, comment and approval. 
Formal milestone approval by the State will be required for milestone invoicing.

The source code (or executable, in the case of COTS products) for each application 
module deliverables will initially be delivered to the IRM Manager of Application Support 
responsible for the Division (or designee) at the time of User Acceptance Testing.  The 
vendor is responsible for installation in the DHSS test environment with IRM staff 
present.  The vendor must remain on-site to address any errors until the application is 
successfully installed.  The project plan must include sufficient time for User Acceptance 
Testing (UAT), which will be coordinated with training for the UAT group.  The vendor is 
responsible for developing a test plan and providing UAT test scripts along with each 
application module.

Deliverables are listed on the next page. Milestones are indicated with the Mn 
designation.





Project Deliverables & Milestones (M1- M7)
Phase 1
Deliverable 1: Detailed Project Plan 

Deliverable 2: Deliverable Document Templates

Approval of Phase 1 (M1)
Phase 2
Deliverable 3: Enrollment and Eligibility Module

Deliverable 4: Admissions and Registration Module

Deliverable 5: Client Assessment Module

Deliverable 6: Treatment Planning Module

Deliverable 7: Clinical Documentation Module

Approval of Phase 2 (M2)
Phase 3
Deliverable 8: Order Entry Module

Deliverable 9: Charge Capture Module

Deliverable10: Reporting Module

Deliverable 11: Care Management Module

Deliverable 12: Pharmacy Module/Pharmacy Interface

Approval of Phase 3 (M3)
Phase 4
Deliverable 13: Clinical Care Delivery Module

Deliverable 14: Case Management Module

Approval of Phase 4 (M4)
Phase 5
Deliverable 15: Clinical Support Module

Deliverable 16: Results Reporting Module

Deliverable 17: Minimum Data Set (MDS) - LTC Clients Module

Deliverable 18: Radiology Module

Approval of Phase 5 (M5)
Phase 6
Deliverable 19: Laboratory Module

Deliverable 20: Client Scheduling Module

Deliverable 21: Patient Accounting/Patient Trust Module

Deliverable 22: Substance Abuse Contractual Programs Module

Approval of Phase 6 (M6)
Phase 7
Deliverable 23: Acceptance in Production of All Delivered Modules

Deliverable 24: Ninety (90) Day Warranty Period

Approval of Phase 7 (M7)

Deliverables shown in bold are mandatory.

Except for the initial and final project phases above, vendors may propose a different 
sequence of phases and deliverables.  Schedule F1 of Appendix F (Project Cost Forms) 
must also reflect this same sequence.

In addition to the functional requirements specified for each deliverable module, the 
following apply to all modules:
*	Relevant forms for each section currently used by DSAMH are listed in Appendix M 
and select forms will be distributed at the mandatory bidder’s conference.  
*	Relevant reports for each section currently used by DSAMH are listed in Appendix M 
and select reports will be distributed at the mandatory bidder’s conference.  
*	Must support use of the latest version of the Diagnosis and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (currently the DSM-IV-TR) diagnoses Axis I - Axis V.
*	Ability to print, view, enter, update and delete information throughout the CCIS 
system only by care-givers authorized to perform such functions
*	Ability to ensure positive client identification when selecting a client in the system by 
fields which include episode/account number, first name, last name, middle initial, 
date of birth, DHSS MCI number, social security number, and address.
*	The system must facilitate the active involvement of the client in the planning and 
delivery of their treatment services.
*	The system must be able to accept batch and/or real time data from DSAMH 
contractors using an interface developed for the CCIS.

Note: in the enumeration of functional requirements, regular text indicates a high level 
priority function requirement and underlined text indicates a lower level priority function.
4.12.1	Phase 1 
This phase is the kickoff of the project where the overall project planning, project 
management and schedule are agreed to and the ground rules and expectations are set.  

The deliverables in this phase are:
Deliverable 1: Detailed Project Plan 
This deliverable is the first update of the project plan submitted with the proposal of the 
selected vendor.  See Section 6.2.4 for a description of this deliverable.

The project plan is a living document and must be updated at least weekly throughout 
the project to reflect actual project status and timelines.  The State must approve any 
change that results in the change of a milestone date.
Deliverable 2: Deliverable Document Templates 
Bidder must work with State staff to design templates for each subsequent document 
deliverable, status reports, issues tracking, executive meeting summaries and other 
project documents. These template designs are critical to ensuring that the deliverables 
and other project documents are in a format agreed to by all parties. Each template must 
be separately approved by the State.  Once the template format is agreed to, the actual 
project documents will be formatted to match the agreed upon template.

With formal State approval of all deliverables in this phase, the milestone payment (M1) 
minus 10% retainage may be invoiced.
4.12.2	Phase 2
The deliverable(s) are as follows:
Deliverable 3: Enrollment and Eligibility Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to support Enrollment & Eligibility information needs for all DSAMH clients 
requiring inpatient or outpatient mental health services, detox, residential or 
outpatient substance abuse services or diversion to another program.
*	Ability to enter the required client demographic data necessary to uniquely 
identify the client by the DHSS Master Client Index (MCI). 
*	Provide an automated method for master client index lookup, a description of the 
MCI/SI system will be distributed at the pre-bid meeting, and if necessary, MCI 
creation or update. 
*	Ability to register a client and collect basic demographic information even if the 
client is not admitted.  This will be a new function.
*	Information for clients who are not admitted will be stored in the Clinical 
Documentation system.  For example, identifying information about the client will 
be stored in the CCIS system.  This can be called up if the client returns for 
screening again or ultimately becomes admitted.  As an example, the CCIS might 
collect insurance or eligibility information.  That could lead to a referral to another 
source of treatment and/or funding.
*	Ability to determine and enter the required clinical information necessary for 
substance abuse and mental health clients; including the Addiction Severity 
Index (ASI).
*	Ability to determine and enter placement criteria including but not limited to the 
American Society of Addiction Medicine’s (ASAM) national guidelines for patient 
placement criteria.  
*	Ability to support the Level of Care Utilization System (LOCUS) instrument during 
clinical assessment.  The LOCUS program used by DHSS is proprietary.  The 
Level of Care Utilization System (LOCUS) was developed by the American 
Association of Community Psychiatrists.  They maintain a web site that contains 
the LOCUS documentation, the site is listed below.  CCIS vendors should 
contact the American Association of Community Psychiatrists to determine 
whether the LOCUS scoring algorithm is in the public domain.  
http://www.wpic.pitt.edu/aacp/finds/locus.html
*	Ability to complete an online application including referral source information, 
Inter-agency transfers, insurance eligibility, payment authorizations, and other 
pertinent data as necessary.
*	Ability to perform an online psychiatric assessment which includes chief 
complaint, history of current and historical illnesses and medications, mental 
status exam, assets and strengths, diagnostic impression, risk factors, risk 
management, problem list, and plan of action.
*	Ability to support management of risk factors identified.  When clinicians are 
presented with client risk factors (such as suicidal ideation) they are required to 
act on those risk factors, they can’t walk away from them.  We are seeking tools 
to help clinicians and their supervisors to both identify the risks (through 
structured assessments) and guidelines for addressing those risks when they are 
discovered.
*	Ability to support the capture of all past histories including personal and family:  
psychiatric and medical illnesses, substance abuse; and social neglect
*	Must support use of the latest version of the Diagnosis and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (currently the DSM-IV-TR) diagnoses Axis I - Axis V.  Basically 
this means automating the recording of the Diagnosis and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (currently the DSM-IV-TR) diagnosis Axis I – Axis V diagnoses 
in the CCIS system.  The “Consumer Reporting Form – Psychiatric Diagnosis” 
form distributed at the vendor’s pre-bid meeting will provide a good example of 
the data that needs to be collected.
*	Ability to perform any and all of the Enrollment & Eligibility functions necessary at 
any point of service on the network and may include contractual providers.
*	Must support standard assessment tools such as ASI, ASAM, LOCUS, and 
DSM-IV-TR where care-giver is prompted for data fields, scores are assigned or 
calculated, and care-giver may override if necessary. DHSS requires that users 
be able to complete these forms online, hence the response to every question 
will need to be collected and stored.
Deliverable 4: Admissions and Registration Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to support all Admission & Registration information needs of DSAMH 
clients in both inpatient, residential, and outpatient settings.
*	Ability to provide a centralized system for data entry for all client demographic 
information that will flow to other areas of the program.
*	Must track completion of all requirements such as “Client Rights” and 
“Permission to Treat”
*	Ability to support informing the client of their rights and providing documentation
*	Ability to print a "Permission to Treat" form and document client acceptance
*	Ability to capture client information for census needs which includes but not 
limited to:  client name; date of birth; location; diagnosis or chief complaint; 
service(s) received; attending caregiver(s); insurance information; and any other 
DSAMH-specific data elements
*	Ability to complete online history and physical forms which include: general client 
information; the results of neurological and other exams; a pain assessment; and 
any other medical conditions.
*	Ability to complete the Advanced Directive and Health Care Surrogate Query 
Form online which includes team recommendations and a method for 
receiving/obtaining the necessary signatures from caregivers and family 
members.  A copy of this document will be distributed at the pre-bid meeting.
*	Ability to provide industry-standard Admission,/Discharge,/Transfer (ADT) 
interface to other modules and ancillary systems, where necessary.
*	Ability to integrate with online insurance verification and eligibility systems, where 
appropriate and possible.  While most billing is to Medicaid and Medicare, 
DSAMH requires the ability for verification and eligibility with approximately ten 
(10) insurance companies.
*	Ability to complete Consumer Reporting Form (CRF) online upon admission or 
transfer.
*	Ability to print DSAMH Notice of Privacy Practices for clients, as well as ability to 
document client and witness acknowledging receipt and review of the provided 
information.
Deliverable 5: Client Assessment Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to support all client assessment information needs of DSAMH clients in 
both inpatient, residential, and outpatient settings.  Most assessments occur at 
admission and at 6 month or 12 month intervals thereafter.
*	Ability to provide various standard assessment templates online.
*	Ability for end user configuration of assessment templates within the CCIS to 
meet specific DSAMH needs of psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, 
nursing, therapy and rehab, pharmacy, and any other caregivers.
*	Ability to support industry standards such as ASI, ASAM, LOCUS, and DSM-IV-
TR for assessment where the caregiver is prompted for data fields, scores are 
assigned or calculated, and caregivers may override.  ASI, ASAM and LOCUS 
are in the public domain and do not require a royalty fee.  If other assessments 
require royalty fees, these will be addressed on a case by case basis.
*	Ability to assess client risk, such as suicide potential or risk of harm to others.
*	Capability to branch into in depth assessment based on triggers from the base 
assessment and/or overrides by caregivers.
*	Ability for rapid, caregiver completion of assessments at the point of care by 
using structured ‘charting techniques’ where checkboxes and drop-down lists are 
used
*	Ability for system date/time stamp to be applied to assessments at the time of 
completion and to not be overridden by caregivers at a later time
*	Ability for information entered once, but required on multiple assessments, to be 
automatically populated for approval by the caregiver completing the assessment 
(e.g. history and physical information captured upon admission).
*	Ability to produce an inter-disciplinary assessment where different portions of the 
assessment can only be completed by appropriate and authorized caregivers. 
*	Ability for multiple caregivers to electronically sign a single, inter-disciplinary 
assessment.
*	Ability to generate automated ‘alerts’ as reminders to care-givers of upcoming 
assessments per the treatment plan
*	Ability to be configured to duplicate all sample DSAMH assessments provided, 
examples will be provided at the pre bid meeting. On the CRF (Consumer 
Reporting Form) and other forms, there are non-HIPAA standard codes being 
used.  DHSS intends to keep its existing codes.   A crosswalk will need to be 
created with HIPAA standard codes sets when standard transactions are created 
and sent.
Deliverable 6: Treatment Planning Module
DHSS anticipates that the vendor will provide an initial library of treatment goals, 
objectives and problems.  This will be expanded upon and/or modified during the 
development phase.  This data set will grow from there based on experience.  This 
module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to support all treatment and care planning information needs of DSAMH 
clients in both inpatient, residential, and outpatient settings.
*	Ability to provide various standard treatment plan templates online without 
requiring programming or end user configuration.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online treatment plan templates to meet 
specific DSAMH needs for inter-disciplinary treatment planning and service 
delivery.
*	Ability to support the standards of Treatment Research Institute (TRI) Concurrent 
Recovery Monitoring, SAMHSA National Registry of Evidence-Based Programs 
and Practices (NREPP) guidelines, Quality Tools initiative sponsored by the 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), Medication Algorithm such 
as the APA or Texas models, and the JCAHO ORYX initiative.
*	Ability to facilitate workflow of inter-disciplinary participants in the treatment plan 
and process through ‘alerts’ that notify a caregiver of an upcoming event.
*	Ability for all services to be addressed in the treatment plan whether they are 
inpatient or outpatient services delivered in one or more locations.
*	Ability for information entered upon assessment, but required on treatment plan, 
to be automatically populated on the Master Treatment Plan to be approved by 
the caregiver completing the assessment (e.g. short term goals).
*	Ability for multiple caregivers to electronically sign a single inter-disciplinary 
treatment plan.
*	Ability for system date/time stamp to be applied to treatment plan at time of 
completion and to not be overridden by caregiver at a later time
*	Ability to be configured to duplicate all sample DSAMH plans provided
*	Ability to customize treatment plans to include client needs and goals
*	Ability to create a treatment plan for each episode of care.  An episode of care is 
a client admission/discharge sequence within a treatment unit, such as a 
Community Mental Health Clinic site or a Delaware Psychiatric Center treatment 
unit.  More than one treatment plan may be created per treatment episode.  
*	Ability to update treatment plans based on a regular schedule.  Routine treatment 
plan update requirements vary by program and a significant change in the client’s 
situation can initiate a treatment plan update or a new treatment plan.  The 
system should maintain a history of the treatment plans and treatment plan 
updates.
Deliverable 7: Clinical Documentation Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to support all clinical care documentation needs of DSAMH clients in both 
inpatient, residential, and outpatient settings.
*	Ability to provide various standard clinical documentation templates online 
without requiring programming or end user configuration, such as DAP notes.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online clinical documentation templates to 
meet specific DSAMH needs.
*	Ability to perform key word searches on ‘free text’ fields for rapid review of 
previously entered clinical notes.
*	Ability to support standardized progress notes such as the “DAP” or “SOAP” 
format.
*	Ability to capture private and public notes based on established sharing 
privileges. 
*	Ability for rapid caregiver data entry at the point of care through the use of 
structured ‘charting techniques’ where checkboxes and drop-down lists are used.
*	Ability to generate automated ‘alerts’ for caregivers as reminders of upcoming 
care requirements for clients.
*	Ability for different caregivers to electronically sign care delivery documentation 
on behalf of the client.  Multiple care givers can sign a care/recovery plan or a 
progress note if multiple staff were involved.
*	Ability for system date/time stamp to be applied to caregiver documentation at 
time of service and to not be overridden later.
*	Ability for caregivers authorized to perform a client service to print, view, enter, 
update, and delete information.
*	Ability to be configured to duplicate all sample DSAMH clinical documentation 
tools provided.
*	Interdisciplinary progress notes are required.
*	Scoring of client participation in groups should be standardized across all 
disciplines, i.e. the Treatment Mall at DPC.
*	Support use of uniform service tickets and progress notes for each clinician 
(CMHC).  In outpatient settings each encounter has a unique identifier 
associated with that encounter.  This is not the case in residential and inpatient 
settings.  At this time, encounter numbers aren’t reassigned and DSAMH doesn’t 
anticipate doing this in the near future. Patient Documentation can be both a 
single visit and longitudinal.  A case note may refer to a single encounter or visit 
while a monthly progress note will summarize progress over a full month.
*	Ability to record unscheduled or walk in visits.
*	Ability to document services to clients provided by phone.
4.12.3	Phase 3
The deliverable(s) are as follows:
Deliverable 8: Order Entry Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to support the entry of all orders required by DSAMH including Physician, 
Consult, Laboratory, Radiology, Medication, Dietary, Therapy, and Supply.
*	Ability to ensure positive client identification when selecting the client requiring an 
order by confirming through a variety of fields including:  episode/account 
number; first name; last name; middle initial; date of birth; DHSS MCI NUMBER; 
social security number; and address.
*	Ability to provide an industry-standard interface between the DSAMH Order Entry 
module and the DSAMH outsourced ancillary systems including Pharmacy, 
Radiology, Laboratory, and Dietary (examples include Redwood, LabCorp, 
Quest, Cardinal Health, etc.).  Interface requirements are not available at this 
time and will need to be developed/obtained during the development process.
*	Ability to provide status information of an order to the caregiver who authorized 
the order.
*	Ability to provide the appropriate user interface for physician order entry at point 
of service.  DHSS requires screens that are quick and efficient for the 
psychiatrists and physicians to use when placing orders for their clients.  
Physicians, like all clinical staff, are pressed for time and will not tolerate delays 
or excessive navigation to get to the screens where they enter their information.  
A streamlined process for identifying the client and entering the appropriate 
orders is required.
*	Ability for rapid caregiver order entry at the point of care using structured order 
sets where key fields (e.g. diagnosis and others) trigger order sets that can be 
edited by exception.
*	Ability to generate automated ‘alerts’ to caregivers of events such as an allergy 
or drug interaction on medication order entry, or a notification of a standing order.
*	Ability for appropriate caregivers to electronically sign the client order, this will 
usually be psychiatrists, physicians, nurse practitioners, and psychologists
*	Ability for system date/time stamp to be applied to order at time of entry and to 
not be overridden at a later time.
*	Ability to print order with care-giver identification for paper chart where necessary
*	Ability to be configured to duplicate all sample DSAMH order forms which will be 
distributed at the mandatory bidder’s conference.
*	Ability to manage use of JCAHO approved abbreviations in orders where 
applicable
*	Ability to print out prescription for client to take with them
Deliverable 9: Charge Capture Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to automatically capture detailed client charges associated with services 
provided in all inpatient, residential, and outpatient locations within DSAMH.
*	Ability to modify Charge Description Master without requiring programming 
intervention.
*	Ability for authorized end users to print, view, enter, update, and delete entries in 
the Charge Description Master that identify all possible chargeable services and 
supplies to be provided to clients along with the associated amount.
*	Ability to utilize an industry-standard interface to the ADL billing/patient 
accounting system if DHSS chooses not to use the Patient Accounting module 
available in the CCIS system chosen.
*	Ability to be configured to duplicate all sample DSAMH order forms provided.
*	Ability to support abstraction of diagnoses and procedures for billing.  Most 
claims require both a diagnosis and a standard HIPAA compliant procedure code 
for payment.  The CCIS system Charge Capture Module should automate the 
rules and algorithm(s) needed to create the diagnosis and procedure code that 
will be used to create a claim and which would be sent to the payor through the 
patient accounting module or system.
Deliverable 10: Reporting Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to generate census lists and reports both online and in printed copy. 
*	Ability to select fields and sort census both online or in reports, by any field 
including client, location, diagnosis, chief complaint, services received, attending 
caregivers, insurance, and dates.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online reports to meet specific DSAMH 
needs.
*	Ability to track and report against all values for performance-based contracts 
utilized by DSAMH, such as statistics on engaging and maintaining clients.
*	Ability to capture data and report on client outcomes and quality of care.
*	Ability to produce reports to analyze client outcomes and quality of care to 
improve management of care across DSAMH and for strategic planning 
purposes.
*	Ability to capture data to produce service line reports to show utilization of 
services.
*	Ability to produce reports for market segment research such as diagnoses across 
zip codes.
*	Ability to capture data to produce statistical reports from all ancillaries by client 
and by product to analyze the continuum of care.
*	Ability to capture data to produce productivity reports showing service volumes 
and costs.
*	Ability to produce reports to analyze case load management across services.
*	Ability to capture and report against consumer survey data to analyze consumer 
satisfaction.
*	Ability to report on Delaware substance abuse and mental health trends using 
identified DSAMH client information.
*	Ability to capture and report data necessary to support HUD, block, local, and 
state grants submissions
*	Ability for end user to initiate data exports from report output to upload into other 
systems including DSAMH DataMart.  The technical expectation is for automated 
retrieval of patient data that is fast, accurate and efficient. Specifications for this 
retrieval process will be spelled out in JAD sessions.  DHSS makes very good 
use of its data mart.  Data is stored in open SQL Server files for extended 
periods of time.  The reporting capability is very flexible and provides several 
options for accessing data.  These include “canned” reports, ad hoc reports, and 
a user friendly query tool.  DHSS will not accept any reduction in this capability 
and applicants should carefully describe enhancements that can be obtained 
from implementation of their system. Ability to incorporate client 
Medicaid/Medicare eligibility and Medicaid Managed Care Organization (MCO) 
lock in information into the system.  Currently this is done at the end of each 
month.  A Business Objects query is run against the MMIS data warehouse and 
the resulting file is loaded into DAMART.  It would be a plus if this could be done 
more frequently, if the process could be automated, and if client files in CCIS 
could be updated automatically with Medicaid/Medicare eligibility and 
Medicaid/MCO lock in data obtained from the MMIS. 
*	Ability to support reporting to the NRI JCAHO ORYX performance measurement 
system.
*	Ability to export data electronically to State and Federal agencies, as required.
Deliverable 11: Care Management Module
DSAMH’s Enrollment and Eligibility Unit (EEU) authorized inpatient stays for contractual 
providers on a day-to-day basis.  Community based programs are authorized on a 
longer term basis, usually a year at a time but sometimes only a few months.  This 
module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to track key events and activities in the Care Management Process.
*	Ability to track when the authorization starts.
*	Ability to track the start and end of certification tracking.
*	Ability to track who is making the referral.
*	Ability to track when the referral packet is received.
*	Ability to track when the determination is made.
*	Ability to track when the consumer is authorized for treatment.
*	Ability to track the following events.
o	What provider was the client referred to
o	When was the Certification form returned
o	How many new referrals are received each month
o	When was the case closed
o	When was the case transferred
o	When the consumer dies
*	Ability to track re-certification which extends a client’s care at the same level of 
care
*	Ability to track re-determinations which changes a client’s level of care
*	Ability to track a transfer, which changes the client’s provider, but retains the 
same level of care
*	Ability to provide a monthly report of everyone who needs recertification
*	Automation of certification forms & documents
*	Ability to interface with providers & provider’s system
o	Include a provider module
o	Include data transfer capability between the state system and the provider 
system
*	The Care Management module should be as close to real time as possible
*	The system must be able to print labels for client files
*	The system must be able to create paper records, forms, and reports as 
required.
*	The system must be able to easily run reports using a built in report generator or 
parameter based reporting system
*	The system must be able to provide access to DSAMH’s High End User client 
information.
*	The system must be able to upload and download authorization information with 
contractual providers
*	Ability to maintain a history of prior authorizations and generate reports on the 
history of prior authorizations.
*	Ability to keep blank forms in the system.
*	Ability to keep discharge worksheets from providers in the system
*	Ability to support the workflow processes necessary in the care management unit 
to…
o	Move progressively from step to step
o	Send back assessments and documents if not acceptable
o	Keep forms on the state web site for outside access
*	Ability to show the number of referrals received in specified time frames
o	Aggregate numbers.
o	Lists of Clients
o	Lists of Clients by referral source
o	Source of referral
o	Numbers of referrals made within specified time frames by consumer 
names, and programs referred to.
o	Reports on other actions such as number of Clients awaiting additional 
information
o	Number of applications denied
*	Ability to track all of the following
o	Clients referred and extract related activity
o	Keep a history of actions, not overwrite information, as an example a 
consumer application could be waiting for more information, then a 
referral is made after the additional information is received, but the history 
should not be overwritten.
*	Reports are needed on basic client demographics, where clients are referred 
from, and where clients are referred to
Deliverable 12: Pharmacy/Pharmacy Interface Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Integrate or Interface with the existing pharmacy software packages or provide a 
pharmacy management module.
*	Ability to support all inpatient, residential, and outpatient pharmacy requirements 
of DSAMH including patient profiling, medication order fulfillment, dispensing, 
manual drug carts, inventory management, and medication charging.
*	Ability to ensure positive client identification when selecting client for pharmacy 
order processing by a variety of fields including episode/account number, first 
name, last name, middle initial, date of birth, DHSS MCI Number, social security 
number, and address.
*	Ability to print, view, enter, update and delete all information necessary to 
process pharmacy orders including all Med Card fields such as:  client 
demographics; MCI number; DSM-IV-TR diagnosis; allergies; medications; 
dosage; route; ordering physician; and order date.
*	Ability to utilize formulary online for order fulfillment, dosage, generic drug use, 
National Drug Code (NDC) identification, side effects, and client education.
*	Ability to generate automated ‘alerts’ upon order fulfillment for events such as a 
client allergy, or drug-to-drug interaction.
*	Ability to facilitate pharmacy workflow through ‘alerts’ that notify pharmacist of 
events such as low inventory, or orders pending fulfillment.
*	Ability for date/time stamping of all workflow steps recorded by the system.
*	Ability to automatically maintain inventory upon fulfillment and stock 
replenishment.
*	Ability to produce reports for inventory management, drug regimen review, and 
various audits including the Office of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs.
*	Ability to print pharmacy forms and signatures for paper chart including 
Medication Administration Record (MAR)
*	Ability for end user configuration of online pharmacy templates to meet specific 
DSAMH needs including pharmacy sample forms and reports provided.
*	Support reporting on medication use including cross tabs for physicians, clients, 
etc. by medication and cost.
4.12.4	Phase 4
The deliverable(s) are as follows:
Deliverable 13: Clinical Care Delivery Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability for authorized caregivers to view; print; enter; update and delete initial 
contact information; assessments; service tickets; inter-disciplinary treatment 
plans and follow-up treatment plan information including goals, objectives, and 
observations; enrollment; registration; assessments; diagnosis; clinical 
documentation; medications; discharge information; and progress notes that 
have either been planned or provided.
*	Ability for authorized staff to view and print data captured during previous 
episodes of care for a crisis client, as listed above.
*	Ability to support all information requirements for crisis intervention services 
provided across Delaware.
*	Ability for clinicians to electronically sign care delivery documentation for each 
client.
*	Ability to complete clinician documentation on system templates.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online clinician templates to meet specific 
DSAMH inpatient, residential, and outpatient client needs without requiring 
programming.
*	Ability for system date/time stamp to be applied to clinician care documentation 
at time of service and not overridden by the clinician at a later time
*	Ability to automate the Money Request Form.  The “money request” form is the 
document used for patients to request access to their funds at DPC.  Its 
completion is monitored by a DPC social worker.  By “automate” DHSS is 
requesting the ability to complete, store, print, and transfer the document within 
the system.  The goal is to streamline operations.
*	Ability to be configured to duplicate all sample DSAMH clinician forms provided.
*	Ability to electronically support management of special programs including the 
Combined Agency Rehabilitation Enterprise (CARE) custodial program.
*	Ability to enter and print attendance records and leisure notes for all events.
*	Ability to enter and update client records of all care provided and observations 
made by clinical staff including assessments, medication administration, activities 
of daily life, seclusion and restraints, and incident reports.
*	Ability to perform discharge planning online to include information such as 
discharge diagnosis, medication, referrals, and anticipated post-service needs.
*	Ability to dispatch and track vehicles and staff.  This would involve dispatching 
staff and their vehicles to various community locations using a wireless device 
such as a blackberry.  Staff could get messages directing them to a client’s home 
for a well being check or to a drop-in center to transport a consumer back to the 
program office.
*	Ability to perform online look-up with remote devices from the field.
*	Ability to print, view, enter, update and delete information only by clinicians 
authorized to do so for a client.
*	Ability to rapidly look-up history, allergies, and medications of previous clients.
*	Ability to schedule client appointments as necessary including consults, 
therapies, counseling, ancillary tests, individual client appointments, escorts, 
conference rooms, and group events including all therapy and visits to treatment 
malls.
*	Ability to support all clinician information needs of DSAMH clients in inpatient, 
residential, and outpatient settings including psychiatric, psychological, physical, 
social services, occupational, speech, music, art, library, therapeutic recreation, 
vocational, and pastoral care services in both individual and group forums, where 
appropriate.
*	Ability to support all social services including social assessments, case 
management, counseling, group treatment, supervision, education, CRFs, 
planning, financial planning, employee services, and discharge planning. 
Deliverable 14: Case Management Module
The TASC agency is a case management agency and will be the primary user of case 
management functions.  The CMHC and DPC programs will also make use of the case 
management functions, but to a lesser degree.  All programs need to track referrals from 
the courts or other sources, assessments, intakes, referrals to providers, progress 
reports from the providers, routine progress notes and reports.  Closures must be 
recorded and final reports, including discharge summaries, sent to the appropriate 
agency.  This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to support the capture and/or exchange of information required by DSAMH 
Case Management programs for all substance abuse and mental health clients 
including Community Continuum of Care (CCCP), Intensive Case Management, 
Supervised Apartments, Assessment and Counseling, Residential Treatment, 
Group Homes, Supportive Housing, Outreach Services, and Drug Court.
*	Ability to provide various standard Case Management templates online without 
requiring programming or end user configuration to meet DSAMH-specific Case 
Management data capture needs.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online Case Management templates to meet 
specific DSAMH needs.
*	Ability to generate automated ‘alerts’ to facilitate Case Management workflow 
and task lists.
*	Ability for authorized Case Managers to view, print, enter, update, and delete 
records of Case Management services including assessments, group notes, and 
discharge/graduation summaries.
*	Ability to support the information needs of Case Management services including 
client events, work lists, service plans, progress notes, and status reports.
*	Ability to support the management of counseling services, court orders, and 
probation and parole processes.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online templates 
*	Ability to be configured to duplicate all sample DSAMH case management forms 
provided.
4.12.5	Phase 5
The deliverable(s) are as follows:
Deliverable 15: Clinical Support Module
Clinical staff have preferred clinical protocols.  Some of these protocols are 
documented in the materials that will be distributed at the pre bid meeting.  Clinical 
protocols differ within the Division and are always changing.  Vendors should 
describe their capability to adapt to changes.  This module will address the following 
functional requirements:
*	Ability to provide all other clinical support functions online required of DSAMH 
including Health Information Management (HIM) or Medical Records, 
Performance Improvement (PI), Quality Assurance (QA), Risk Management 
(RM), and Utilization Review (UR).
*	Ability to support the exchange of information with HIM including the electronic 
tracking of medical records, client identification by MCI NUMBER, use of DSM-
IV-TR, transcribing dictated progress notes, and retrospective chart review.
*	Ability to support PI needs including the documentation of inter-disciplinary work 
teams that address client improvements.
*	Ability to support DSAMH’s management of the quality and outcomes of its 
services.  QA needs include the MDS and JCAHO ORYX reporting.
*	Ability to capture RM data including follow-up on incident reports, infection 
control, medication errors and variances, abuse and neglect, and staff injury to 
drive plans of correction.
*	Ability to meet UR information needs including capturing census information, the 
tracking of Medicare and Medicaid Carve-outs, and issuing letters of non-
conformance.
*	Ability to capture compliance information in support of surveys including those 
performed by Medicaid, CMS, JCAHO, CARF, and the Fire Marshall.
*	Ability to capture and report safety information including seclusion, restraint, and 
support/safety device use
*	Ability to capture date in support of DSAMH governing bodies such as the Policy 
Committee and the Performance Improvement Steering Committee.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online templates to meet specific DSAMH 
data capture needs.
*	Ability for authorized support staff to view and print data captured during the 
delivery of care including enrollment, registration, client census, client 
assessment, treatment planning, and clinical documentation
Deliverable 16: Results Reporting Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to support results reporting of all orders entered by DSAMH including 
Physician, Consult, Laboratory, Radiology, Medication, Dietary, and Therapy.
*	Ability to ensure positive client identification when selecting the client requiring an 
order by confirming through a variety of fields including:  episode/account 
number; first name; last name; middle initial; date of birth; DHSS MCI Number; 
social security number; and address.
*	Ability for authorized users to review results. 
*	Ability to display results and normal ranges.
*	Ability to graphically display one or more results to demonstrate trends.  There 
are two aspects to graphical display of results.  One level is the electronic display 
of an individual test result.  Similar to having the paper copy in hand, the system 
would display an electronic version of the document.  In this section, we are 
going to a second level where a series of results are displayed that show a trend.  
For instance, white blood cell counts for the client could be displayed (graphically 
or tabular or both) for the last 12 weeks.  This would show the trend of the 
readings, not just a single “point in time” reading.  Images must be accessible 
through the CCIS although they may be accessed through an interface to a 
separate imaging system.  Vendor is expected to propose an image resolution 
that is in line with healthcare industry expectations.
*	Ability for rapid caregiver total order set results viewing at the point of care. 
*	Ability to provide status information to authorized users of tests and results using 
an industry-standard interface between the Order Entry module and other 
ancillary order systems which include Pharmacy, Radiology, Laboratory, Dietary, 
and others (e.g. Redwood Laboratory, LabCorp, Quest, and Cardinal Health) and 
store the results in the CCIS system.
*	Ability to generate automated ‘alerts’ to caregivers of events such as an 
abnormal STAT result, or notification of results received.
*	Ability for different caregivers to electronically sign results, when necessary. 
*	Ability for system date/time to be stamped to all result statuses during processing 
*	Ability to print result with signature line for paper chart where necessary
*	Electronically track when a user has accessed a result (throughout)
Deliverable 17: Minimum Data Set (MDS) for LTC Clients Module
The MDS is a requirement of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). 
More information is available at the following web site.
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/MinimumDataSets20/025_ManualsAndForms.asp#TopOfPage
This module will address the following functional requirements:

*	Ability to support electronic capture of the Minimum Data Set (MDS) assessment 
required for certified Long-term Care bed billing on either a quarterly and annual 
basis, or upon a significant status change.
*	Ability for authorized caregivers to print, view, enter, update and delete 
information.
*	Ability to support use of all MDS standards including DSM-IV-TR, flow sheets, 
vitals/measurements, and daily life activities
*	Ability for authorized caregivers to electronically sign MDS information.
*	Ability for system date/time to be stamped on all MDS entries 
*	Ability to print MDS assessment forms online.
*	Ability for end users to export MDS data to State and Federal agencies, as 
required.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online templates to meet specific DSAMH 
MDS data capture needs.
*	Ability to be configured to duplicate all sample CMS MDS forms provided.
Deliverable 18: Radiology Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to support general Radiology services, predominantly X-ray, required for 
DSAMH inpatients.
*	Ability to electronically receive radiology orders, and to record, and report results.
*	Ability to receive written reports and images from contractual radiography 
providers and store in the system.  Information on specifications for image format 
and transmission-specifications will be submitted to the selected vendor.  
DSAMH expects that the CCIS system will be able to receive medical reports like 
drug test results, blood test results, and x-ray reports from laboratories and store 
it in the database for access by the CCIS users.  In addition, the system should 
be able to record and transmit doctor’s orders.  An example of this would be the 
electronic transfer of a medication order to the pharmacy system.  Vendors 
should describe their capability to accept images such as lab results and what 
formats they are capable of handling.
*	Ability to ensure positive client identification when selecting client for radiology 
order processing by a variety of fields including episode/account number, first 
name, last name, middle initial, date of birth, DHSS MCI Number, social security 
number, and address.
*	Ability for authorized caregivers to print, view, enter, update, and delete all 
information necessary to process radiology tests including client demographics, 
diagnosis, ordering physician, and order date.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online radiology forms to meet DSAMH-
specific needs including samples provided
4.12.6	Phase 6
The deliverable(s) are as follows:
Deliverable 19: Laboratory Module
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to support laboratory services delivered by outsourced providers including 
LabCorp for inpatient services, and Quest and Redwood Laboratory for 
outpatient services or other Lab services the state may contract with.
*	Ability to electronically record lab orders and submit requisitions to reference 
labs.
*	Ability to print specimen labels for clients when blood and urine specimens are 
collected at the point of service.
*	Ability to accept results from outsourced provider systems and store in the 
Electronic Health Record (HER).
*	Ability for authorized caregivers to print, view, enter, update, and delete all 
information necessary to process tests.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online laboratory forms to meet specific 
DSAMH needs including samples provided.
*	Ability to generate reports on lab requisitions for the accounts payable office.
Deliverable 20: Client Scheduling Module
Currently the outpatient programs (CMHC and TASC) use MS Outlook for client 
scheduling.  It involves a complicated scheme of permissions that allow clerical staff to 
schedule appointments for clinical staff, which the clinical staff can view from their PC.  
This module will address the following functional requirements:
*	Ability to utilize a Master Schedule to enter client appointments at any and all 
locations including:  outpatient counseling; physician appointments; therapy 
appointments; and inpatient-scheduled events.
*	Ability to schedule resources including conference rooms and equipment.
*	Ability to schedule group events including dances and visits to treatment mall.
*	Ability to enter and update schedules only by authorized system users.
*	Ability to view and print schedules by any combination of dimensions including:  
by client; by caregiver; by treatment unit by location; by specified date range; and 
by appointment type, etc.
*	Ability to generate automated ‘alerts’ as reminders to caregivers of upcoming 
events that require their participation.
*	Ability for end user configuration of online schedule layout to meet specific 
DSAMH calendar needs.
*	Ability to be configured to duplicate all sample DSAMH-provided schedules that 
will be distributed at the mandatory bidders conference.
*	Ability to search for clients on the schedule
*	Ability to report on client no shows and client cancellations
*	Ability to schedule individual and group appointments.
*	Ability to eliminate paper appointment books and interface with Microsoft Outlook 
Calendar to put appointments in staff Outlook Calendars.  
Deliverable 21: Patient Accounting/Patient Trust Module
DSAMH currently uses the ADL software to bill Medicaid, Medicare, private insurance, 
and clients.  DSAMH also uses the Provider Electronic Solution (PES) software, which is 
free from the MMIS system vendor (Electronic Data Systems - EDS), to bill Medicaid.  
DSAMH requires full billing capability including tiered billing to up to three payment 
sources including the client themselves.  This module will address the following 
functional requirements:
*	Ability to interface client census, insurance, and services with the ADL Computer 
System, Inc. used by DHSS if not selected for Patient Accounting and Patient 
Trust
*	Ability to support all inpatient and out patient billing and patient accounting 
requirements of DSAMH including billing, collections, accounts receivable, and 
bad debt.
*	Ability to demonstrate ‘tight integration’ between clinical and billing modules.
*	Ability to provide an industry-standard interface for integration between 
Registration, Clinical Care Modules, and Billing Module for insurance 
identification and charge entry.
*	Ability for authorized business office designees to view, print, enter, update, and 
delete all patient accounting information.
*	Ability to generate automated ‘alerts’ to facilitate workflow and task lists for 
managing billings and receivables.
*	Ability to support both HCFA-1500 and UB-92 billing requirements.
*	Ability to provide an industry-standard interface to third-party payer 
administrators to meet Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) Transaction Set requirements.
*	Ability to perform coordination of benefits and to produce client statements and 
bills.
*	Ability to support Accounts Receivable aging and produce Collection Reports.
*	Ability to perform receivable account posting for patient accounting.
*	Ability for authorized business office designees to perform account write-offs due 
to bad debt.
*	Ability to provide an industry-standard interface for posting revenue and bad debt 
to the general ledger
*	Ability to provide reconciliation tools for monthly financial processes.
*	Ability to support the performance contracting system operated for DSAMH 
substance abuse outpatient and intensive outpatient treatment programs.  This 
contracting system rewards and penalizes providers for achievement of specific 
performance targets based on utilization, client engagement, progression through 
levels of treatment, and client completion of treatment.
*	Ability, at a minimum, to provide the following billing and accounts receivable 
functions for both inpatient and outpatient programs
o	Admission, discharge and transfer (ADT) for inpatient and outpatient 
programs
o	Census Reports
o	All billing
o	Calculation of all 3rd party contractual allowances
o	Medicare IPPS Psychiatric Facility
o	Medicare Part B billing, Fee for Service, Per Diem
o	Demand bills
o	Standard A/R reports (include examples)
o	Report writer
o	Out patient billing (CMHCs)
o	Electronic billing
o	Electronic remittance and posting
o	Client billing
o	Third party billing (HCFA UB92 and 1500 forms)
o	Recording of misc. receipts (such as donations)
o	HIPAA compliant

*	Ability, at a minimum, to provide the following patient trust functions for the 
residents of inpatient programs
o	Patient Accounts (A minimum of 4 sub-accounts is required at DPC).  
?	The patient trust accounts DHSS needs are Spending, Savings, 
Burial, and a Hold account. They are used to track money for 
different purposes.  All debits and credits are tracked.  Debits are 
tracked by transaction date, description, and check number that 
the cash is being withdrawn from.  Credits are tracked by 
transaction date, description and the receipt number given by the 
cash office. 
o	Monthly Patient Trust Fund Statements
o	Monthly Patient Trust Interest Allocation
o	Real Time Account Balances
Deliverable 22: Substance Abuse Contractual Programs Module
DHSS requests that CCIS vendors provide capability for Substance Abuse (SA) 
contractual treatment providers to “piggy back” on the system procured by DHSS.  The 
contractual relationship and payment schedule will be directly between the CCIS vendor 
and treatment providers.  No costs for contractual SA providers should be included 
in this proposal.  This is not a mandatory business requirement.  This module will 
address the following functional requirements:
*	DSAMH requires real time CRF admission and discharge data from providers, 
within 24 hours of events.
*	Ability to be flexible, allowing user changes, reports, and modifications
*	Ability to provide the platform to report the SA NOMS required by the federal 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA)
*	Ability to keep client/progress notes confidential.
*	The system must collect or integrate performance data from SA programs.
*	OP – extensive incentives based on evidence based practices
*	IOP – less extensive incentives based on evidence based practices
*	Residential – has a tiered payment system, which is being modified
*	Detox – contractual provider is paid on a per diem basis
*	The system must collect or integrate service data required for OP programs.
*	Ability to collect or integrate the ASI and ASAM patient placement criteria data 
from state and contractual providers.
*	Ability to collect or integrate data about the medications used by providers
*	The system must be capable of receiving data from both contractual and non-
contractual Delaware SA providers
*	DSAMH contractors can piggy back on the DSAMH CCIS project, they will incur 
incremental costs.
*	Ability to provide census reports for all programs
*	Ability to provide waiting list reports for all programs.
*	Ability to provide all standard demographics, including drug use history for 
primary, secondary, and tertiary drugs for all programs.
4.12.7	Phase 7
The deliverable(s) are as follows:
Deliverable 23: Acceptance in Production of All Delivered Modules
This deliverable consists of final State approval of all delivered modules and their 
implementation into production.
Deliverable 24: Ninety (90) Day Warranty Period
As the final deliverable of the project, vendor will supply 90 days of warranty support 
after the final production implementation of all modules.  The first two weeks of warranty 
support will be on-site. The warranty period provides for issue resolution, bug fixes and 
system functionality problems with the new system. This support is included in the firm 
fixed price.

With formal State approval of all deliverables in this phase, the milestone payment (M7) 
may be invoiced. The total M7 payment is the sum total of the retainages from milestone 
payments M1 thru M6. See subsection 7.2 for details on project payments.
4.13	Project Expectations
Contractor will be expected to address the following requirements in detail. Emphasis is 
on the limited availability of state staff for this project and the expectation that the 
contractor express in detail their understanding of their responsibilities in the areas of 
Customization/Development, Implementation, Warranty, Training, and Deliverables. 
4.13.1	Customization/Development
Vendor assumes primary responsibility for this project with minimal assistance from state 
staff. The vendor will propose the duration of the project although it cannot exceed 12 
months from the date of the State’s purchase order.
4.13.2	Site Requirements
For non-ASP solutions, the application and database infrastructure and platforms must 
be located at the Biggs Data Center on the DHSS Herman Holloway Sr. Health & Social 
Services Campus in New Castle, Delaware. In addition to production, a separate, 
isolated UAT environment shall be set up so as to minimize interference with the 
production environment. Additional staging areas may be proposed at the discretion of 
the vendor.  Bidder will address how each of these areas will be set up and utilized.  
Separate Data Center test and production environments will be maintained for the life of 
the system. Proposals must provide for adequate ongoing licenses to maintain each 
environment.

DHSS prefers the use of web browser based applications and given the option between 
web browser based applications and other types of applications, will select the web 
browser based solution.  Vendors should note though that ASP/COM applications that 
use MTS/Component Services present security difficulties in the DHSS IT Environment 
and will generally not be allowed.

When a web browser based solution is not available, DHSS runs all "thick client" 
applications (sometimes referred to as "client/server applications") on the Citrix 
Metaframe platform.  Vendors proposing such applications must ensure full Citrix 
Metaframe compatibility.  DHSS has infrastructure in place to present Citrix based 
applications to internal network users and/or external users via the Internet.

Any remote access by IT vendors will be accomplished through the use of SSL-VPN.  
Direct modem dial-up access is not allowed.  If a vendor expects or requires remote 
access for proper implementation and/or support of his product, proposals must detail 
the exact nature of the remote access required and why it cannot be accomplished 
through other means.  Vendors should note that under no circumstances is "remote 
control" of user desktops ever allowed and the State of Delaware firewall will block such 
access.  For remote access to Windows based servers in the Biggs Data Center DMZ, 
either RDP or Citrix must be used.

If the vendor will use any third party products during the course of this project, such 
products must be approved in writing by DHSS prior to their use.  In order to receive 
such approval the vendor is required to submit a list of the products, the number of 
licenses that will be procured (if applicable), a description of how the product will be 
used.  The description must include whether the product is only required for 
customization/development or whether it would be required for ongoing 
support/maintenance.  Each product must also have an outline as to its initial and 
ongoing costs (including, but not limited to, licensing, maintenance, support, run time 
licensing versus developer licensing, and so on).  Approval of third party products is 
ultimately at the discretion of DHSS.

Any software purchased or developed for DHSS must be an appropriate fit into the 
DHSS IT Environment.  The current DHSS IT Environment is described in Appendix D.   
Vendors should describe how their proposal's components are consistent with the 
current environment.  Vendors may propose solutions that are not consistent with the 
current environment but in that case must include a detailed analysis of how their 
solution's requirements will be integrated into the existing DHSS IT Environment 
(including, but not limited to, purchases required, set up requirements and so on). The 
state wishes to leverage the existing infrastructure at the Biggs Data Center to the extent 
possible.  Bidder will describe how their system will take advantage of the existing 
infrastructure. All proposals (and/or their attendant integration suggestions) will be 
evaluated for their fit into the current environment. Utilization of this infrastructure will be 
a factor in proposal evaluation.   

The State prefers to purchase third party hardware and software directly unless there is 
significant advantage to the State in having the hardware/software as vendor 
deliverables. In either case, all software licenses must be in the name of DHSS and 
must provide for separate test and production environments.
4.13.3	System Testing
Contractor will consult with IRM to ensure that all aspects of the testing environment are 
ready. Conversion run tests from existing system will be scheduled through IRM. These 
tests will be scheduled to run during off peak hours so as to minimize network load.   
Each developed entity will be thoroughly tested by the contractor before it is scheduled 
for acceptance testing with the State.
4.13.4	User Acceptance Testing (UAT)
Each system module will undergo UAT by the State prior to production implementation. 
The locations for UAT State staff will be at the State’s discretion. Upon formal State 
approval of the module’s UAT, it will be scheduled with IRM for implementation into the 
production environment.
4.13.5	Conversion
An integral part of the project will be to integrate into the new system, historical data 
from the existing DHSS systems. The existing DHSS systems are the following:

Mandatory
*	Patient Management Information System (PMIS)
*	DAMART data mart
*	Pharmacy – Visual SuperScript
*	Pharmacy – QS/1
Optional
*	ADL Data Systems, Inc. - Patient Accounting/Patient Trust
*	Level of Care Utilization System (LOCUS)
*	MMIS Prior Authorization, Eligibility, and MCO Lock in Status

Conversion controls, especially the monitoring and proof of initial conversion results, are 
very important to ensure that the transactional source data converted into the system is 
accurate prior to implementation. Initial and ongoing conversion controls and balancing 
procedures must be described. Bidders must describe their approach to data conversion 
and describe in detail how they will convert existing data. Data conversion must be 
addressed in the proposed project plan.
4.13.6	Training
Contractor will be responsible for training users in all aspects of the new system. 
Training will be outlined in a training plan discussing expectations and schedules. A 
training planning session must be held to review the training plan prior to the first actual 
training session. This will enable State and Contractor staff to better communicate during 
these sessions. Contractor will detail in their proposal a training plan outline and 
schedule for users of each component of the system.
4.13.7	Support Services
Bidders must include a description of the ongoing support they are proposing which will 
start after the warranty phase.  Support includes annual licenses (if any), 24 by 7 help 
desk support, bug fixes, updates and new releases. Costs for such services will need to 
be shown in the Business Proposal volume, together with a statement that such services 
will be available for a minimum of five years after the warranty period. The first year will 
be mandatory; years two through five will be at the State’s option.  Support cost inflation 
is discussed on the cost forms.

Bidder must guarantee that their proposed solution will comply with all mandatory 
requirements, including HIPAA, throughout the entire support phase.  Bidder will also 
specify expected deadline dates for completion of such modifications after the provision 
of detailed, written notice of impending changes from DSAMH.

Bidders should also address the following in their proposal:
*	Identify your average of your response and resolution times.  Provide examples of 
current measurements and metrics.
*	Describe your process for providing application fixes and enhancements.
*	Identify your average turnaround time for fixes and enhancements.
*	Confirm whether or not clients have the opportunity to provide input into the 
prioritization of new features and enhancements.
*	Identify your anticipated 2006–2008 schedule for new releases and updates.
*	Confirm whether you have User Conferences and/or Advisory Boards.

It is critical that the proposed solution include ongoing support services and assurance 
that all regulatory requirements will be met for DSAMH.  Other details and specific 
requirements are included in various sections throughout this RFP.
4.13.8	Maintenance Services
Bidders must also provide:
*	An estimate of the number of hours required to apply the DHSS customization 
features to new releases.
*	A single fully loaded hourly rate which will apply to this work, as well as to future 
customization.

This information will need to be shown in the Business Proposal.  Support cost inflation 
is discussed on the cost forms.
4.14	Technical Approach and Requirements

The vendor must provide a detailed description of the proposed CCIS.  The detailed 
description must address each of the following elements:
1.		A description of your software solution and the suggested technical approach 
including any third-party software and hardware; software and database 
platforms; scalability, and archive, back-up and disaster recovery features.
2.		A description identifying whether or not the software solution is in use at Joint 
Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) accredited 
facilities and is capable of reporting JCAHO/ORYX performance measures.
3.		A description of how your software supports both current and future Clinical Care 
best practices.  One example is the use of tools such as ASI, ASAM, and LOCUS 
for clinical assessment.
4.		A description of an alternative solution and an explanation of benefits are needed 
if the proposed Clinical Care software solution does not comply with the 
standards defined in the websites referenced in Appendix D.
5.		A description of how historical and current data will be loaded into the new 
database.  If your software solution provides a “Loader Module” describe how it is 
configured and/or programmed.  Also, indicate whether or not this is used to 
create program interfaces to other third-party products including existing 
systems.
6.		A description/explanation of how your product complies with HIPAA electronic 
transaction, privacy, and security regulations.
7.		A description of what procedures are necessary to add/modify/delete security 
rules and authorized users. Describe what skill set is required to effectively 
perform security administration. 
8,		Explanations of the workflow processes to be implemented for patients entering 
the proposed DSAMH Clinical Care solution.  Include the initial consultation, 
clinical assessment, prescribed care, necessary scheduling, updates to the care 
plan, and discharge.  Applicable workflows in a diagram format with a detailed 
explanation are required. These workflows should include, but not limited to, 
inpatient mental health, outpatient mental health, detox/residential substance 
abuse and outpatient substance abuse.
9.		If applicable, explain how enterprise scheduling of client services is performed.  
Also, confirm how a best practices care plan would be used as the baseline for 
scheduling treatments.
10.		Describe how treatment plans will be built into the proposed software solution 
and can be configured by the end-users.
11.		A description of how your software effectively provides for the capture and 
analysis of clinical outcomes including but not limited to federal reporting 
requirements (particularly CSAT and CMHS), TEDS, NOMS, SOMMS, and 
JCAHO/ORYX.
12.		Indicate whether systems, screens, and workflow procedures are modifiable.  If 
these elements are modifiable, describe how.
13.		A list of all standard reports included in your solution.  If the standard reports do 
not satisfy DSAMH requirements, describe how a new report would be created.  
Also, indicate if this would require internal or external report creation, and if the 
request would be classified as a production fix, or an enhancement.  Reports 
required by DSAMH are described in the Functional Requirements of this 
document.
14.		Internal security for the Clinical Care System must be multi-tiered, by job 
title/function and area of responsibility, and must be compliant with all 
administrative, physical, and technical safeguards set forth in the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).  At all security levels a view 
only option is required.
15.		For internal compliance auditing mandates, the system must date/time stamp 
and record the user on all transactional records.
16.		Due to the continual modification of government regulations and restrictions, 
source code will be available for DHSS modifications.  Otherwise the vendor will 
provide written procedures and assurances that all government regulations will 
be implemented on a timely base.  It is the responsibility of the vendor to be 
aware of changes or new government requirements.  DHSS will assist in 
disseminating information, but the ultimate responsibility resides with the CCIS 
vendor.  
17.		Modifications to third-party bolt-on products (pharmacy, document management, 
etc.) must have minimal technical interface requirements.
18.		The software must ensure easily maintainable and modifiable internal back-up 
and archive processes.
19.		The ability for end-user configuration of online templates to meet specific 
DSAMH data capture needs is required.
20.	The new system must include the capability to import key data collected by 
DSAMH’s providers into the “reporting” system operated by DSAMH with 
required data for client admissions, discharges, services, outcomes, status 
changes, etc.  A close to “real time” exchange of data between DSAMH’s 
providers and the CCIS system is required. 
21.	The proposed solution must be integrated with the existing Master Client 
Index/Service Integration (MCI/SI) system to utilize the MCI number for client 
identification purposes for both new and existing clients.  MCI numbers are never 
reused.  If duplications are discovered one of the MCI numbers is inactivated.  
MCI/SI is a mainframe system which provides a central shared client database 
(DB2) to which all DHSS systems commonly link.  The MCI number is a ten-digit 
number assigned by the MCI/SI system. The MCI/SI system is utilized by at least 
twenty other DHSS systems and must be retained. Additional information about 
the MCI/SI system will be distributed at the pre-bid meeting.
22.		DHSS would like to replace the following systems, particularly if they are 
integrated modules within the CCIS system proposed by the vendor.  The other 
systems listed in Section 1.2 could be replaced if a better module is presented in 
the CCIS proposal.
*	Patient Management Information System
*	Data collection front end of DAMART
*	Drug Evaluation Network System (ASI software)
*	SuperScript Pharmacy Software
*	ADL Systems, Inc.  Patient Accounting, Patient Trust, and MDS22. 
23. 	Vendor proposals need to address their approach to interfacing with the following 
systems which provide services to DSAMH and its clients:
*	Medicaid Management Information System (MMIS) [Prior Authorization for 
approved clients] - DSAMH staff use the prior authorization module of the 
MMIS to authorize care for clients using higher levels of care. This is a client 
server system with DB2 as the database.
*	Quest Diagnostics Incorporated
*	LabCorp (Laboratory Corporation of America)
*	Redwood Toxicology Laboratory
24.	The CCIS must support the identification, implementation, and maintenance of 
new clinical processes that are considered a "Best Practice" and/or an 
"Evidence-based Practice" (EBP) that will improve DSAMH's delivery of services.
25.	The CCIS will also support an environment that will enhance the care delivery 
process and client interaction in the future.  CCIS should support client 
participation in their care and communication with their care providers.  At this 
time DHSS does not anticipate that consumers will use/access the system 
directly, only DHSS staff and contractual staff.
26.	CCIS must create a platform for building comprehensive electronic health 
information and will allow this information to be available 24/7.  The system must 
be available through the state wide area network.
27.	Since DSAMH provides a number of 24/7 services, CCIS must be available 24/7 
with minimal scheduled downtime.
28.	CCIS will provide data on a real time basis for client enrollment, Medicaid 
enrollment, recent services, and medication use.
29.	CCIS should support a seamless treatment process with contract providers and 
other third parties.
*	CCIS should be easily configured to receive data from other third-party 
systems.
*	CCIS should be easily configured to send data to other systems or entities.
*	CCIS will provide decision support tools to bring “Best Practices" and 
"Evidence-based Practices” to the point of care. 
*	CCIS will support current standards and provide user-defined templates for 
future standards.
*	The CCIS environment (through the surrounding architecture) will support 
access to benchmarking databases, as needed.
30.	All interfaces should use industry standard methods like HL7.
31.	Vendors must demonstrate their commitment to ensuring that “Best Practices" 
and "Evidence-based Practices” identified in market trends are incorporated into 
their solutions and product(s).
32.	The systems technology must support all of the current end-users and clients 
needs.  The total number of users will be approximately 500; concurrent usage of 
200 is anticipated.  Personnel accessing the Clinical Care Information System 
will be located in New Castle, Delaware and other locations throughout the State. 
DHSS contractual providers will not be on the state network and will require 
access via the Internet.
33.	Technology will be adaptable and scalable to support future operational 
requirements within the state’s IT standards.
34.	DHSS expects the CCIS contractor to provide both training materials and training 
personnel.  A complete training package is expected.  The CCIS vendor is free to 
propose a direct training package and/or a “training of trainers” approach.  CCIS 
training will be mandatory for staff required to use the program.  Delaware 
Psychiatric Center and Ellendale Detox operate 24/7.  Accommodations will be 
needed for staff on all three shifts.
35.	The 24/7 support staffing is to be bid for the post-implementation maintenance 
phase.
36.	The latest releases of all vendor and third-party software included in the 
proposed Clinical Care solution must be in production at two separate client 
sites.  Beta versions aren’t acceptable.  
37.	The ability for end-users to export data in standard formats (including HL7, XML, 
CSV, and fixed-record layout) for integration with other software and external 
databases.
38.	The ability to either print completed online forms to share with clients or produce 
paper versions is required.  The ability to print blank forms if needed for use in 
remote locations is also required.
39.	The proposed solution must be able to generate JCAHO/ORYX performance 
measures.
40.	The proposed solution must be TEDS/NOMS/SOMMS compliant based on 
specifications developed by the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment (CSAT) 
and the Center for Mental Health Services (CMHS).
41.	




5	Proposal Evaluation/Contractor Selection
5.1	Process
DHSS will conduct at three tiered review process for the Clinical Care Information 
System project.  

In the first tier,  each Technical Proposal will be evaluated to determine if it meets the 
Mandatory Submission Requirements described in Appendix G – Mandatory (Pass/Fail) 
Submission Requirements Checklist.  Any proposal failing to meet those 
requirements is subject to immediate disqualification without further review.  All 
proposals meeting the mandatory submission requirements will be given to the DHSS 
Evaluation Team.

In the second tier, the DHSS Evaluation Team will   perform  a Technical Proposal 
Review.  Technical Proposals receiving a passing score of 50 or higher will be eligible to 
have the Business Proposal reviewed.  The individual scores of each evaluator will be 
averaged to determine a final technical score and a final business score.  Technical and 
Business scores will be combined to determine each bidder’s total score.
  After the DHSS Evaluation Team completes its initial review, staff from the Department 
of Technology and Information (DTI) will review the top two (2) to five (5) applications 
and provide comments and recommendations to the DHSS Evaluation Team which will 
be used in selecting the vendors to demonstrate their proposed solution.  The 
demonstrations will be used in DHSS Evaluation Team’s final deliberations.


Vendors may be required to demonstrate their proposed solutions.



In the third tier, DHSS Evaluation team findings will be presented to an Executive 
Selection Committee. The Executive Selection Committee will review DHSS Evaluation 
Team findings. A potential contractor will be recommended to the Secretary, Department 
of Health & Social Services. Final selection is at the discretion of the Secretary or his 
designee.

5.2	Proposal Evaluation and Scoring
The Technical and Business proposals of each bidder will be evaluated and assigned 
points.  A maximum of 100 total points is possible.  
5.2.1	Mandatory Requirements
This portion of the evaluation will be performed by the Division Director or designee.  
Each proposal will be reviewed for responsiveness to the mandatory requirements set 
forth in the RFP.  This will be a yes/no evaluation and proposals that fail to satisfy all of 
the criteria of this category may not be considered further for the award of a Contract.  
Specific criteria for this category are as follows: Vendor is required to address Section 4 
“Contractor Responsibilities/Project Requirements” in detail by subsection and bullet.  
Vendor is required to follow Section 6 “Bidder Instructions” explicitly and complete all 
required forms as instructed.

Failure to adequately meet any one (1) mandatory requirement may cause the 
entire proposal to be deemed non-responsive and be rejected from further 
consideration.  However, the State reserves the right to waive minor irregularities and 
minor instances of non-compliance.  
5.2.2	Technical Proposal Scoring
Only those bidders submitting Technical Proposals which meet the Mandatory 
Submission Requirements provision will have their Technical Proposals scored. 
Technical Proposals which fail to meet this provision will be rejected and will not be 
scored.

Only those Technical Proposals with a Total Technical Score of 50 or higher will have 
their associated Business Proposals scored. Technical Proposals with a Total Technical 
Score below 50 will be rejected.  Bidders with rejected Technical Proposals will not have 
their Business Proposals scored.



Category
Maximum 
Assigned Points
Meets Mandatory RFP Requirements
Pass/Fail
Appropriateness of Proposed Solution in 
Terms of Business & Technical 
Requirements
30
Organization, Staff Qualifications and 
Experience With Similar Projects
30
Understanding Scope of the Project
10
Project Management Methodology
10
Total Maximum Technical Score
80

5.2.3	Business Proposal Scoring
Total business score will be based on the costs submitted as part of the cost worksheet.  
Strong consideration will be given to how well the costs in the Project Cost Forms 
compare to the level of effort for this and other proposals along with the accuracy of the 
submitted figures. The State of Delaware reserves the right to reject, as technically 
unqualified, proposals that are unrealistically low if, in the judgment of the evaluation 
team, a lack of sufficient budgeted resources would jeopardize project success.

Total Maximum Business Score
20
  .
5.2.4	Total Points Awarded
(Total Technical Score + Total Business Score) = Total Evaluation Score

Total Maximum Evaluation Score
100


6	Bidder Instructions

6.1	Submission Information
This subsection describes procedures and conditions that will affect the preparation and 
submission of bidder proposals.

The proposal must be submitted in seventeen (17) separate volumes bound separately 
and submitted under separate cover.
Volume 1 – Technical Proposal
Volume 2 – Business Proposal

Copies of each volume:
Two (2) signed originals and fifteen (15) copies.
Two (2) CD's with electronic versions of the entire proposals in Adobe .pdf and Microsoft 
Word .doc (2000 or higher) formats.  This will be used for researching the proposals and 
reprinting as necessary.

Each CD will contain the following files at a minimum:
*	RFP Technical Proposal.doc
*	RFP  Business Proposal.doc
*	RFP Technical Proposal.pdf
*	RFP Business Proposal.pdf
*	RFP Project Plan.mpp
*	CD Directory.doc

Each of the proposal files must be a single file comprising each entire proposal. Each 
proposal file in .pdf format must be a printable copy of each original volume submitted. 
The project plan contained in the technical proposal files must also be submitted 
separately as an .mpp file. Other files may be submitted separately. The CD 
Directory.doc file must contain a Word table listing each file contained on the CD along 
with a short description of each. Bidder must certify that these CD's have been scanned 
and are free from viruses and other malicious software. 

The original copies of each of the Technical and Business Proposal Volumes must be 
clearly marked as such. In addition, see Section 8 for copies of other required forms to 
be included in each proposal. 



The Technical Proposal Volume copies must be labeled on the outside as follows:


State of Delaware
Department of Health and Social Services
RFP

Volume 1
Clinical Care Information System - Technical Proposal

DHSS RFP #PSC 693R
(Name of Bidder)

September 13, 2006 11:00 A.M. 

The Business Proposal Volume copies must be labeled on the outside as follows:

State of Delaware
Department of Health and Social Services
RFP

Volume 2
Clinical Care Information System - Business Proposal

DHSS RFP #PSC 693R
(Name of Bidder)

September 13, 2006 11:00 A.M. 
6.1.1	Proposal Delivery
Proposals must be delivered to:
			
Sandra Skelley, Procurement Administrator
DE Department of Health & Social Services
Division of Management Services
Procurement Branch, DHSS Campus
Administration Building- 2nd Floor Main Bldg., Room 259
1901 N. DuPont Highway
New Castle, DE 19720
6.1.2	Closing Date
All responses must be received no later than September 13, 2006 11:00 A.M. ET.
6.1.3	Notification of Award 
Proposed date the Notification of Award will be mailed to all bidders: November 6, 2006.

6.1.4	Bidder Questions
All questions shall be submitted in written form only and shall reference the pertinent 
RFP section(s) and page number(s).  Questions and written answers will be distributed 
to all mandatory pre-bid meeting attendees as an addendum to the RFP.  Verbal 
responses given at the bidders’ conference will be informational only and non-binding. 
Questions should be sent via fax or email to:
Division Contact Name		Darlene Plummer
Division Name				Division of Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Division Address			First Floor, Main Building
					Herman M. Holloway, Sr. Campus
					1901 N. DuPont Highway
					New Castle, DE  19720
Division Contact EMail		darlene.plummer@state.de.us
Division Contact Fax:			(302) 255-4428

Questions will be accepted following the mandatory pre-bid meeting until August 1, 2006 
04:30 P.M. ET. DHSS will not respond to questions received after that time.  A final list 
of written questions and responses will be posted as an RFP addendum on the Internet 
at www.state.de.us/dhss/rfp/dhssrfp.htm.  Bidders may not contact any other state staff 
to pose questions. 
6.1.5	Anticipated Schedule
The following timetable is anticipated for key activities within the procurement process:


Activity
Schedule
State Publishes RFP
July 10, 2006
Mandatory Bidder's Conference
July 25, 2006 10:00 A.M. ET
Submission of Questions
August 1, 2006 04:30 P.M. ET
Response to Questions
August 15, 2006 04:30 P.M. ET
Receipt of Proposals
September 13, 2006 11:00 A.M. ET
Selected Vendors’ Demonstrations
October 5, 2006 thru October 26, 2006
Notification of Award
November 6, 2006
Contract Signature/Project Start
January 2, 2007
Project End
January 3, 2008
6.1.6	Proposal Becomes State Property
All proposals become the property of the State of Delaware and will not be returned to 
bidders.  DHSS will not divulge specific content of proposals to the extent that the bidder 
identifies contents as privileged or confidential. Any information not so designated will be 
considered public information.
6.1.7	RFP and Final Contract
The contents of the RFP will be incorporated into the final contract and will become 
binding upon the successful bidder. 
6.1.8	Proposal and Final Contract
The bidder's proposal will be incorporated into the final contract and be considered 
binding upon the successful bidder.
6.1.9	Modifications to Proposals
Modifications to proposals will not be accepted after the submission deadline.  At any 
time, DHSS reserves the right to request clarification and/or further technical information 
from any contractor submitting a proposal.
6.1.10	Alternative Solutions
The proposal must contain a single solution, including hardware and software. This is 
critical in ensuring project success and that project costs are expected, administered and 
contained.  Bidders may propose alternative solutions but only as fully separate 
proposals that will be evaluated separately. Single proposals containing 
alternative/multiple solutions will be failed.
6.1.11	Cost of Proposal Preparation
All costs of proposal preparation will be borne by the bidder.
6.1.12	Mandatory Pre-bid Meeting
The Division will hold a mandatory pre-bid meeting. Attendance is mandatory for those 
firms interested in submitting a bid.  Proposals will not be accepted from firms not 
attending this meeting. The pre-bid meeting will take place on:

July 25, 2006 10:00 A.M. 
Delaware Health and Social Services
Herman M. Holloway Sr. Campus
Medical Library, Springer Building
1901 N. DuPont Highway
New Castle, DE 19720
6.2	Volume I – Technical Proposal Contents
The Technical Proposal shall consist of and be labeled with the following sections:

A.	Transmittal Letter
B.	Required Forms
C.	Executive Summary
D.	Project Management Plan
E.	Contractor Responsibilities/Project Requirements 
F.	Staff Qualifications and Experience
G.	Firm Past Performance and Qualifications

The format and contents for the material to be included under each of these headings is 
described below.  Each subsection within the Technical Proposal must include all items 
listed under a heading because evaluation of the proposals shall be done on a section-
by-section or functional area basis.  No reference to, or inclusion, of cost information 
shall appear in the Technical Proposal or Transmittal Letter.
6.2.1	Transmittal Letter (Section A)
The Transmittal Letter shall be written on the bidder's official business letterhead 
stationery.  The letter is to transmit the proposal and shall identify all materials and 
enclosures being forwarded collectively in response to this RFP.  The Transmittal Letter 
must be signed by an individual authorized to commit the company to the scope of work 
proposed.  It must include the following in the order given:

1.	An itemization of all materials and enclosures being forwarded in response to the 
RFP
2.	A statement certifying that the proposal CD’s have been scanned and are free from 
viruses and other malicious software.
3.	A reference to all RFP addendums received by the bidder (by addendum number 
and issue date), to warrant that the bidder is aware of all such addendums in the 
event that there are any; if none have been received by the bidder, a statement to 
that effect must be included
4.	A statement that all proposal conditions are valid for 180 days from the deadline date 
for proposal submission
5.	A statement that price and cost data are not contained in any part of the bid other 
than in the Business Proposal volume
6.	A statement that certifies pricing was arrived at without any collusion or conflict of 
interest

The original of the Transmittal Letter shall be submitted in a separate, sealed envelope 
inside the package containing the Technical Proposals.  All other copies of the 
Transmittal Letter shall be bound into the copies of the Technical Proposal.
6.2.2	Required Forms (Section B)
This section of the proposal will include the following completed forms:
Certification and Statement of Compliance
Appendix B. This is a mandatory form in which the bidder must certify certain required 
compliance provisions.
Mandatory Submission Requirements Checklist
Appendix G. This is the mandatory submission requirements checklist. Agreement to or 
acknowledgement of a requirement is shown by a Y (Yes) or N (No) next to the 
requirement and a signature at the bottom of the checklist. Failure to adequately meet 
any one (1) mandatory requirement may cause the entire proposal to be deemed 
non-responsive and be rejected from further consideration. However, the State 
reserves the right to waive minor irregularities and minor instances of non-compliance.
State of Delaware Contracts Disclosure
Appendix H. On this form, bidder shall list all contracts awarded to it or its predecessor 
firm(s) by the State of Delaware that have been active during the last three (3) years. 
Failure to list any contract as required by this paragraph may be grounds for immediate 
rejection of the bid.
Bidders Signature Form
Appendix J. This is a standard bidder information form.

Office of Minority and Women Business Enterprise Self-Certification Tracking 
Form
Appendix K. This is an optional form

Bidder Project Experience 
Appendix L. This provides a standard form to document vendor’s work on similar 
projects.

6.2.3	Executive Summary (Section C)
Present a high-level project description to give the evaluation team and others a broad 
understanding of the technical proposal and the bidder’s approach to this project. This 
should summarize project purpose, key project tasks, a timeline, deliverables and key 
milestones, qualifications of key personnel, along with subcontractor usage and their 
scope of work.  A summary of the bidder's corporate resources, including previous 
relevant experience, staff, and financial stability must be included. The Executive 
Summary is limited to a maximum of ten (10) pages.
6.2.4	Project Management Plan (Section D)
Bidder shall describe the overall plan and required activities in order to implement the 
project within the budget and described schedule. This should include descriptions of 
management controls, processes and reporting requirements that will be put into place 
to ensure a smooth administration of this project. 
Project Plan (Section D.1)
Bidder must outline a project plan with the following information:
*	Key dates including dates for deliverable submission, State deliverable approval, 
Federal deliverable approval (if required) and milestones
*	Staffing structure, with a breakdown by activity, task and subtask within the entire 
project
*	An organization chart with staff names & functional titles
*	Description at the subtask level including duration and required staff resources 
(contractor vs. State) and hours
*	Resource staffing matrix by subtask, summarized by total hours by person, per 
month.

The project plan must be in Microsoft Project format. Bidder must also discuss 
procedures for project plan maintenance, status reporting, deliverable walkthroughs, 
subcontractor management, issue tracking and resolution, interfacing with State staff 
and contract management.

A sample Microsoft project plan will be distributed to vendors attending the mandatory 
bidders conference. It provides the general format that vendors must follow when 
constructing their project plan.  Vendor plans must reflect each deliverable and 
milestone in the specified format.  Review periods as specified in the RFP must be built 
into the project schedule.  Serial deliverable review periods must be shown - the best 
way to do this is to link the "State Review of Deliverable" task with the prior deliverable's 
review task.  The project plan is a critical deliverable and must reflect all dependencies, 
dates and review periods. If the plan has issues, the state will not approve the initial 
milestone payment. Vendor staff expertise in MS Project is critical for proper 
construction and maintenance of this plan.  

NOTE: Deliverables 3 through 22 are described at a module level.  The project plan 
must be more detailed and include items such as:
*	Requirements JAD sessions
*	Requirements document *
*	Design JAD sessions
*	Design document *
*	User manual or on-line help *
*	Training plan *
*	UAT *
*	Production implementation *

For the items shown with an asterisk above, the plan needs to provide time for DHSS 
review and approval.
6.2.5	Project Requirements (Section E)
Bidder must describe their understanding and approach to meet the expectations and 
mandatory requirements specified in Section 4. Please address each numbered 
subsection in this section separately in sequence as “RFP Section 4.x.x”. Address 
bulleted and titled requirement paragraphs within subsections as “Bullet n” and 
“Paragraph Title” respectively. Please address State staffing considerations in 
subsections where staffing is mentioned.  The Crosswalk of RFP Section 4 in Appendix I 
must be completed in full and included in the beginning of this section of the bidder’s 
proposal.
6.2.6	Staff Qualifications and Experience (Section F)
Bidders shall submit a staff skills matrix in their own format to summarize relevant 
experience of the proposed staff, including any subcontractor staff in the areas of:
*	Project Management
*	Technical Project Management
*	Business Analysis
*	Technical Analysis
*	Development
*	Subject Matter (Behavioral Health Clinical Expertise) Development
*	Documentation
*	Planning
*	Training
Additionally, bidders shall provide a narrative description of experience each key staff 
member has in the areas relevant to this project. Bidder and subcontractor staff shall be 
separately identified. Contractor staff requirements will be addressed as outlined in 
subsection 4.1. Resumes will be formatted as outlined in Appendix E and included in this 
section of the proposal. Bidder must also provide an organization chart of all proposed 
staff.

If sub-contractors are being proposed, then include the name and address of each sub-
contractor entity along with an organization chart indicating staffing breakdown by job 
title and staff numbers on this project. This organization chart must show how the 
individual sub or co-contractor entity will be managed by your firm as the primary 
contractor.  Any sub or co-contractor entity(s) proposed will need prior approval by the 
State before the contract is signed. If proposing no sub contractors, please state in this 
proposal section “No sub-contractors are being proposed as part of this contract.” 
Please refer to RFP Appendix A for sub/co-contractor standards.
6.2.7	Firm Past Performance and Qualifications (Section G)
The bidder shall describe their corporate experience within the last five (5) years directly 
related to the proposed contract.  Also include experience in:
*	Other state/county government projects of a similar scale
*	Other behavioral health inpatient and outpatient projects of a similar scale
*	Electronic Medical Records projects
*	Implementation and project management experience on similar size projects
Experience of proposed subcontractors shall be presented separately.  

Provide a summary description of each of these projects including the contract cost and 
the scheduled and actual completion dates of each project.  For each project, provide 
name, address and phone number for an administrative or managerial customer 
reference familiar with the bidder’s performance.  Use the form provided in Appendix L.

Provide an example of an actual client implementation plan, similar in magnitude to the 
CCIS, including staff, dates, milestones, deliverables, and resources.
6.3	Volume II – Business Proposal Contents
The business proposal volume will contain all project costs along with evidence of the 
bidder’s financial stability.
6.3.1	Project Cost Information (Section A)
The bidder shall provide costs for the Technical Proposal Volume as outlined in 
Appendix F.

In completing the cost schedules, rounding should not be used.  A total must equal the 
sum of its details/subtotals; a subtotal must equal the sum of its details.

The Total Cost shown in Schedule F1 must include all costs (except out year 
costs) that the selected vendor will be paid by DHSS.  If specialized hardware or 
software will be provided by the vendor, it must be included as a deliverable in the 
this schedule.

A sample Microsoft Excel version of Schedule F1 will be distributed to vendors attending 
the mandatory bidders conference.

Cost information must only be included in the Business Proposal Volume. No cost 
information should be listed in the Technical Proposal Volume. 

A Project Cost Cap is specified in Appendix F and is a mandatory submission 
requirement.
6.3.2	Software and Hardware Information (Section B)
On a separate page of the Business Proposal entitled “Software Licensing Structure” list 
each module and each third party software application listed in either Schedule F1 or 
Schedule F5.  Describe what required (or optional) functions from section 4 that the 
particular module or application includes. Discuss the licensing structure (per seat, 
concurrent user, site, etc.) for each.  

All licenses must be in the name of the State and must provide for separate test 
and production environments.

On a separate page of the Business Proposal entitled “Hardware Description” list each 
hardware item listed in either Schedule F1 or Schedule F6.  Provide a description of its 
function and a detailed component list.
6.3.3	Corporate Stability and Resources (Section B)
The bidder shall describe its corporate stability and resources that will allow it to 
complete a project of this scale and meet all of the requirements contained in this RFP.  
The bidder’s demonstration of its financial solvency and sufficiency of corporate 
resources is dependent upon whether the bidder's organization is publicly held or not:

If the bidder is a publicly held corporation, enclose a copy of the corporation's most 
recent three years of audited financial reports and financial statements, a recent Dun 
and Bradstreet credit report, and the name, address, and telephone number of a 
responsible representative of the bidder's principle financial or banking organization; 
include this information with copy of the Technical Proposal and reference the enclosure 
as the response to this subsection; or
If the bidder is not a publicly held corporation, the bidder may either comply with the 
preceding paragraph or describe the bidding organization, including size, longevity, 
client base, areas of specialization and expertise, a recent Dun and Bradstreet credit 
report, and any other pertinent information in such a manner that the proposal evaluator 
may reasonably formulate a determination about the stability and financial strength of 
the bidding organization; also to be provided is a bank reference and a credit rating (with 
the name of the rating service); and
Disclosure of any and all judgments, pending or expected litigation, or other real or 
potential financial reversals, which might materially affect the viability or stability of the 
bidding organization; or warrant that no such condition is known to exist.

This level of detail must also be provided for any subcontractor(s) who are proposed to 
complete at least ten (10) percent of the proposed scope of work.


7	Terms and Conditions
The following provisions constitute the terms and conditions of the contractual 
agreement between the State of Delaware, Department of Health and Social Services 
(DHSS) and its contractor. This section contains terms and conditions specific to this 
RFP. The general terms and conditions are contained in Appendix A. The standard 
departmental contract is contained in Appendix C. 
7.1	Contract Composition
The terms and conditions contained in this section constitute the basis for any contract 
resulting from this RFP. The State will be solely responsible for rendering all decisions 
on matters involving interpretation of terms and conditions. All contracts shall be in 
conformity with, and shall be governed by, the applicable laws of the federal government 
and the State of Delaware.

The component parts of the contract between the State of Delaware and the contractor 
selected from the evaluation of responses to this RFP shall consist of:

*	The Delaware contract signed by all parties, and any subsequent amendments to 
that document
*	The RFP, inclusive of appendices and exhibits
*	Any amendments to the RFP
*	The contractor's proposal and any written clarifications or representations 
incorporated as part of the procurement process.

In the event of any conflict between the terms and provisions of this contract and other 
documents executed preliminary to construction of this contract, the terms and 
provisions of this contract shall prevail over conflicting terms and provisions in these 
other documents.
7.2	Payment for Services Rendered
Services will be bound by a firm fixed price contract. The firm fixed price will be the 
Total Cost shown in Schedule F1 (Appendix F).  Payments will be made based upon the 
contractor's satisfactory completion and State approval of the identified scheduled 
milestones.
7.3	Contract Term
The maximum term of the project is one year from contract signature.  Bidder may 
propose a shorter term in their proposal.
7.4	Contractor Personnel
DHSS shall have the right to require the Contractor to remove any individual from his/her 
assignment to this Agreement by the Contractor or any subcontractor, if, in the opinion of 
DHSS, such employee is uncooperative, inept, incompetent or otherwise unacceptable. 
If the vendor must make a staff substitution for whatever reason, a staff person with 
equivalent qualifications and experience will be proposed to the State as soon as 
possible. The State Project Director(s) must approve this substitution before their term 
on the project begins. In the event that a staff position becomes temporarily or 
permanently vacant for any reason, including the contractor’s choice to reassign a staff 
member, DHSS may reduce payments to the Contractor in the amount equal to the 
vacated positions pay rate for the time period the position is vacant. DHSS may choose 
to waive its right to reduce payments if the State Project Directors approve a proposed 
replacement staff member who can assume the vacated position immediately upon its 
vacancy.
7.5	DTI Requirements
The Supplier(s) shall be responsible for the professional quality, technical accuracy, 
timely completion, and coordination of all services furnished by the Supplier(s), its 
subcontractors and its and their principals, officers, employees and agents under this 
Agreement. In performing the specified services, the Supplier(s) shall follow practices 
consistent with generally accepted professional and technical standards. The Supplier(s) 
shall be responsible for ensuring that all services, products and deliverables furnished 
pursuant to this Agreement comply with the standards promulgated by the Department 
of Technology and Information (DTI) and as modified from time to time by DTI during the 
term of this Agreement. These standards will be provided upon request to vendors 
attending the mandatory bidder’s conference. If any service, product or deliverable 
furnished pursuant to this Agreement does not conform to DTI standards, the Supplier(s) 
shall, at its expense and option either (1) replace it with a conforming equivalent or (2) 
modify it to conform to DTI standards. The Supplier(s) shall be and remain liable in 
accordance with the terms of this Agreement and applicable law for all damages to 
Delaware caused by the Supplier's failure to ensure compliance with DTI standards.

The contractor agrees that it shall indemnify and hold the State of Delaware and all its 
agencies harmless from and against any and all claims for injury, loss of life, or damage 
to or loss of use of property caused or alleged to be caused, by acts or omissions of the 
contractor, its employees, and invitees on or about the premises and which arise out of 
the contractor’s performance, or failure to perform as specified in the Agreement.

It shall be the duty of the Vendor to assure that all products of its effort do not cause, 
directly or indirectly, any unauthorized acquisition of data that compromises the security, 
confidentiality, or integrity of information maintained by the State of Delaware. Vendor’s 
agreement shall not limit or modify liability for information security breaches, and Vendor 
shall indemnify and hold harmless the State, its agents and employees, from any and all 
liability, suits, actions or claims, together with all reasonable costs and expenses 
(including attorneys' fees) arising out of such breaches. In addition to all rights and 
remedies available to it in law or in equity, the State shall subtract from any payment 
made to Vendor all damages, costs and expenses caused by such information security 
breaches which have not been previously paid to Vendor.
7.6	Funding
This contract is dependent upon the appropriation of the necessary funding.

DHSS reserves the right to reject or accept any bid or portion thereof, as may be 
necessary to meet its funding limitations and processing constraints.  
7.7	Confidentiality
The contractor shall safeguard any client information and other confidential information 
that may be obtained during the course of the project and will not use the information for 
any purpose other than the Contract may require.
7.8	Method of Payment:
The agencies or school districts involved will authorize and process for payment each 
invoice within thirty (30) days after the date of receipt.  The contractor or vendor must 
accept full payment by procurement (credit) card and or conventional check and/or other 
electronic means at the State’s option, without imposing any additional fees, costs or 
conditions.



8	Appendices

Appendices referenced in this RFP are included in this section.  The following are 
included for the bidder’s use in submitting a proposal.  
A. General Terms and Conditions
B. Certification and Statement of Compliance
C. Standard Departmental Contract
D. Website Links
E. Key Position Resume
F. Project Cost Forms
G. Mandatory (Pass/Fail) Submission Requirements Checklist
H. State of Delaware Contracts Disclosure
I. Crosswalk of RFP Section 4
J. Bidders Signature Form
K. Office of Minority and Women Business Enterprise Self-Certification Tracking 
Form
L. Bidder Project Experience
M. List of all Relevant Forms and Reports

The following Appendices must be completed by all bidders and included as part of the 
specified proposal:
*	Technical Proposal - Appendices B, E, G, H, I, J, L
*	Business Proposal – Appendix F


Appendix 

A.	General Terms and Conditions


Appendix A
General Terms and Conditions 

The following provisions are applicable to all DHSS RFP’s

1)	Proposal Becomes State Property 
	 All proposals become the property of the State of Delaware and will not be 
returned to contractors. 


2)	RFP and Final Contract 
	 The contents of this RFP will be incorporated into the final contract and will 
become binding upon the successful bidder.  If bidders are unwilling to comply with 
certain RFP requirements, terms and conditions, objections must be clearly stated in the 
proposal and will be subject to negotiation at the discretion of the Department.  


3)	Proposal and Final Contract 
	 The bidder's proposal will be incorporated into the final contract and be 
considered binding upon the successful bidder.


4)	Amendments to Proposals 
	Amendments to proposals will not be accepted after the submission deadline.  
DHSS reserves the right to request clarification and/or further technical information from 
any contractor submitting a proposal at any time.


5)	Cost of Proposal Preparation 	
	All costs of proposal preparation will be borne by the bidder.


6)	Investigation of Contractor's Qualifications
	The State of Delaware may make such investigation as it deems necessary to 
determine ability of potential contractors to furnish required services, and contractors 
shall furnish the State with data requested for this purpose. The State reserves the right 
to reject any offer if evidence submitted or investigation of such contractor fails to satisfy 
the State that the contractor is properly qualified to deliver services.

	Bidder shall list all contracts awarded to it or its predecessor firm(s) by the State 
of Delaware during the last three years, by State Department, Division, Contact Person 
(with address/phone number), period of performance and amount. The 
Evaluation/Selection Review Committee will consider these as additional references and 
may contact these sources. Information regarding bidder performance gathered from 
these sources may be included in the Committee's deliberations and may be factored 
into the final scoring of the bid. Failure to list any contract as required by this paragraph 
may be grounds for immediate rejection of the bid. 


7)	Certifications, Representations, Acknowledgments
Using Appendix B, bidding contractors must certify that:

They are a regular dealer in the services being procured.
They have the ability to fulfill all requirements specified for development with this RFP.
They have independently determined their prices.
They are accurately representing their type of business and affiliations.
They have acknowledged any contingency fees paid to obtain award of this contract.
They have included in their quotation all costs necessary for or incidental to their total 
performance under the contract.
They will secure a Delaware Business License.
They will secure the appropriate type and amounts of insurance coverage required by 
the State. Proof of such coverage will be a requirement of the contract.


8)	Ownership Rights
	The State will retain ownership rights to all materials including software, designs, 
drawings, specifications, notes, electronically or magnetically recorded material, and 
other work in whatever form, developed during the performance of this contract.  A 
fundamental obligation herein imposed on the Contractor is the assignment by the 
Contractor to DHSS of all ownership rights in the completed project. This obligation on 
the part of the Contractor to assign all ownership rights is not subject to limitation in any 
respect, whether by characterization of any part of the deliverables as proprietary or by 
failure to claim for the cost thereof. The provisions of this article shall be incorporated 
into any subcontract.


9)	Federal/State Access Rights
	Appropriate Federal and/or State representatives will have access to work in 
progress and to pertinent cost records of the contractor and its subcontractors at such 
intervals as any representative shall deem necessary. 


10)	Reserved Rights of the Department of Health & Social Services
	The Department reserves the right to:

Reject any and all proposals received in response to this RFP
Select for contract or for negotiations a proposal other than that with the lowest cost
Waive or modify any information, irregularities or inconsistencies in proposals received;
Negotiate as to any aspect of the proposal with any proposer and negotiate with more 
than one proposer at the same time;
If negotiations fail to result in an agreement within two weeks, terminate negotiations and 
select the next most responsive proposer, prepare and release a new RFP, or take such 
other action as the Department may deem appropriate.


11)	Standard for Subcontractors
	The contract with the prime contractor will bind sub contractors to the prime 
contractor by the terms, specifications and standards of this statement of work and any 
subsequent proposals and contracts.  All such terms, specifications, and standards shall 
preserve and protect the rights of the State with respect to the services to be performed 
by the sub, or co-contractor, so that the sub or co-contractor will not prejudice such 
rights. The use of subcontractors on this project must have the prior approval of the 
State.


12)	Irrevocable License
	The State of Delaware reserves a royalty-free, exclusive, and irrevocable license 
to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use the copyright of any deliverables developed 
under the resulting contract.


13)	Non-Discrimination
	The selected provider will be required to sign a contract containing a clause that 
prohibits the provider from discriminating against employees on the basis of their race, 
color, sex, religion, age and national origin.
 

14)	Right to a Debriefing
	To request a debriefing on a bidder selection, the bidder must submit a letter 
requesting a debriefing to the Procurement Administrator, DHSS, within ten days of the 
announced selection. In the letter, the bidder must specifically state the reason(s) for the 
debriefing. Debriefing requests must be based on pertinent issues relating to the 
selection process. Debriefing requests based on specifications in the RFP will not be 
accepted. All debriefing requests will be evaluated in accordance with these conditions. 
Debriefing requests that meet these conditions will be reviewed and respectively 
answered by the Procurement Administrator and/or Debriefing Committee. 


15)	Hiring Provision 
	Staff contracted to provide the services requested in this RFP are not precluded 
from seeking employment with the State of Delaware.  The contractor firm selected as a 
result of this RFP shall not prohibit their employees or subcontractor staff from seeking 
employment with the State of Delaware.


16)	Anti Lobbying
	The selected contractor must certify that no Federal funds will be used to lobby 
or influence a Federal officer or a Member of Congress and that the contractor will file 
required Federal lobbying reports.


17)	Anti Kick-back
	The selected contractor will be expected to comply with other federal statutes 
including the Copeland "Anti-Kickback Act" (18 U.S.C.874), Section 306 of the Clean Air 
Act, Section 508 of the Clean Water Act , and the Debarment Act. 


18)	Delaware Contract Language
	Appendix C contains a copy of the standard Departmental contract, which will be 
used for the agreement between the State and the wining bidder. The State will not 
entertain any modifications to the language of this document. By submitting a proposal 
to this RFP, the bidder agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions in that contract 
document. 


19)	Project Cost
	The Department reserves the right to award this project to a bidder other than the 
one with the lowest cost or to decide not to fund this project at all.  Cost will be balanced 
against the score received by each bidder in the rating process. The State of Delaware 
reserves the right to reject, as technically unqualified, proposals that are unrealistically 
low if, in judgment of the Selection Committee, a lack of sufficient budgeted resources 
would jeopardize the successful completion of the project.


20)	Public Record
The Department will not divulge specific content of proposals to the extent that the 
contractor identifies contents as privileged or confidential.  Any information not so 
designated will be considered public information.


21)	Minority/Women/Disadvantaged Business Certification
If the proposer wishes to have M/W/D business enterprise status taken into 
consideration, they should summit proof of such certification with their bid response. 
Further information, guidelines and forms for such certifications can be found at:
http://www2.state.de.us/omwdbe/



 


 Appendix 

B.	Certification and Statement of Compliance


 
 

DELAWARE HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL

CERTIFICATION SHEET

As the official representative for the bidder, I certify on behalf of the agency that:
a.  They are a regular dealer in the services being procured.
b.  They have the ability to fulfill all requirements specified for development within this 
RFP.
c.  They have independently determined their prices.
d.  They are accurately representing their type of business and affiliations.
e.  They will secure a Delaware Business License.
f.	They have acknowledged that no contingency fees have been paid to obtain award 
of this contract.
g.	The Prices in this offer have been arrived at independently, without consultation, 
communication, or agreement, for the purpose of restricting competition, as to any 
matter relating to such prices with any other contractor or with any competitor;
h.	Unless otherwise required by Law, the prices which have been quoted in this offer 
have not been knowingly disclosed by the contractor and prior to the award in the 
case of a negotiated procurement, directly or indirectly to any other contractor or to 
any competitor; and
i.	No attempt has been made or will be made by the contractor in part to other persons 
or firm to submit or not to submit an offer for the purpose of restricting competition.
j.	They have not employed or retained any company or person (other than a full-time 
bona fide employee working solely for the contractor) to solicit or secure this 
contract, and they have not paid or agreed to pay any company or person (other 
than a full-time bona fide employee working solely for the contractor) any fee, 
commission percentage or brokerage fee contingent upon or resulting from the 
award of this contract.
k.	They (check one) operate ___an individual; _____a Partnership ____a non-profit 
(501 C-3) organization; _____a not-for-profit organization; or _____for Profit 
Corporation, incorporated under the laws of the State of____________.
l.	The referenced bidder has neither directly or indirectly entered into any agreement, 
participated in any collusion or otherwise taken any action in restraint of free 
competitive bidding in connection with this bid submitted this date to Delaware 
Health and Social Services
m.	The referenced bidder agrees that the signed delivery of this bid represents the 
bidder’s acceptance of the terms and conditions of this invitation to bid including all 
specifications and special provisions.



n.	They (check one): _______are; _____are not owned or controlled by a parent 
company.  If owned or controlled by a parent company, enter name and address of 
parent company:

				__________________________________________
				__________________________________________
				__________________________________________
				__________________________________________

 Violations and Penalties:
Each contract entered into by an agency for professional services shall contain a 
prohibition against contingency fees as follows:
1.	The firm offering professional services swears that it has not employed or retained 
any company or person working primarily for the firm offering professional services, 
to solicit or secure this agreement by improperly influencing the agency or any of its 
employees in the professional service procurement process.
2.	The firm offering the professional services has not paid or agreed to pay any person, 
company, corporation, individual or firm other than a bona fide employee working 
primarily for the firm offering professional services, any fee, commission, 
percentage, gift, or any other consideration contingent upon or resulting from the 
award or making of this agreement; and
3.	For the violation of this provision, the agency shall have the right to terminate the 
agreement without liability and at its discretion, to deduct from the contract price, or 
otherwise recover the full amount of such fee, commission, percentage, gift or 
consideration.

The following conditions are understood and agreed to:

a.  No charges, other than those specified in the cost proposal, are to be levied upon the 
State as a result of a contract.

b.  The State will have exclusive ownership of all products of this contract unless 
mutually agreed to in writing at the time a binding contract is executed.

			            							
Date				 Signature & Title of Official Representative


							
Type Name of Official Representative


PROCUREMENT


			        STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE    




             As the official representative for the contractor, I
Certify that on behalf of the agency that _________________________
(Company name) will comply with all Federal and State of Delaware laws, rules, and 
regulations, pertaining to equal employment opportunity and affirmative action laws.  In 
addition, compliance will be assured in regard to Federal and State of Delaware laws 
and Regulations relating to confidentiality and individual and family privacy in the 
collection and reporting of data.




Authorized Signature:_____________________________________________



Title:____________________________________________________________


Date:______________________________________________________________




Appendix 

C.	Standard Departmental Contract



					CONTRACT

A)   Introduction

1.	This contract is entered into between the Delaware Department of Health and Social 
Services (the Department), Division of ______________ (Division) and  
_______________________(the Contractor).


2.	The Contract shall commence on __________________ and terminate on 
_____________ unless specifically extended by an amendment, signed by all parties 
to the Contract. Time is of the essence. (Effective contract start date is subject to the 
provisions of Paragraph C 1 of this Agreement.)

B)  Administrative Requirements

1.	Contractor recognizes that it is operating as an independent Contractor and that it is 
liable for any and all losses, penalties, damages, expenses, attorney's fees, 
judgments, and/or settlements incurred by reason of injury to or death of any and all 
persons, or injury to any and all property, of any nature, arising out of the 
Contractor's negligent performance under this Contract, and particularly without 
limiting the foregoing, caused by, resulting from, or arising out of any act of 
omission on the part of the Contractor in their negligent performance under this 
Contract.  

2.	The Contractor shall maintain such insurance as will protect against claims under 
Worker’s Compensation Act and from any other claims for damages for personal 
injury, including death, which may arise from operations under this Contract. The 
Contractor is an independent contractor and is not an employee of the State.

3.	During the term of this Contract, the Contractor shall, at its own expense, carry 
insurance with minimum coverage limits as follows:

		a) Comprehensive General Liability		   $1,000,000
	and
		b) Medical/Professional Liability                        $1,000,000/ $3,000,000 
                              
or	c)  Misc. Errors and Omissions		   $1,000,000/$3,000,000

or         d)  Product Liability				   $1,000,000/$3,000,000

	
	All contractors must carry (a) and at least one of (b), (c), or (d), depending on the 
type of service or product being delivered. 

If the contractual service requires the transportation of Departmental clients or staff, 
the contractor shall, in addition to the above coverage, secure at its own expense the 
following coverage:

		e)  Automotive Liability (Bodily Injury)	    $100,000/$300,000
		f)  Automotive Property Damage (to others)	              $ 25,000

4.	Not withstanding the information contained above, the Contractor shall indemnify 
and hold harmless the State of Delaware, the Department and the Division from 
contingent liability to others for damages because of bodily injury, including death,  
that may result from the Contractor’s negligent performance under this Contract, and 
any other liability for damages for which the Contractor is required to indemnify the 
State, the Department and the Division under any provision of this Contract.

5.	The policies required under Paragraph B3 must be written to include Comprehensive 
General Liability coverage, including Bodily Injury and Property damage insurance 
to protect against claims arising from the performance of the Contractor and the 
contractor's subcontractors under this Contract and Medical/Professional Liability 
coverage when applicable.

6.	The Contractor shall provide a Certificate of Insurance as proof that the Contractor 
has the required insurance. The certificate shall identify the Department and the 
Division as the “Certificate Holder” and shall be valid for the contract’s period of 
performance as detailed in Paragraph A 2.  

7.	The Contractor acknowledges and accepts full responsibility for securing and 
maintaining all licenses and permits, including the Delaware business license, as 
applicable and required by law, to engage in business and provide the goods 
and/or services to be acquired under the terms of this Contract. The Contractor 
acknowledges and is aware that Delaware law provides for significant penalties 
associated with the conduct of business without the appropriate license.  

8.	The Contractor agrees to comply with all State and Federal licensing standards and 
all other applicable standards as required to provide services under this Contract, to 
assure the quality of services provided under this Contract.  The Contractor shall 
immediately notify the Department in writing of any change in the status of any 
accreditations, licenses or certifications in any jurisdiction in which they provide 
services or conduct business.  If this change in status regards the fact that its 
accreditation, licensure, or certification is suspended, revoked, or otherwise 
impaired in any jurisdiction, the Contractor understands that such action may be 
grounds for termination of the Contract.



9.	Contractor agrees to comply with all the terms, requirements and provisions of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and any other federal, state, 
local or any other anti discriminatory act, law, statute, regulation or policy along 
with all amendments and revision of these laws, in the performance of this Contract 
and will not discriminate against any applicant or employee or service recipient 
because of race, creed, religion, age, sex, color, national or ethnic origin, disability 
or any other unlawful discriminatory basis or criteria. 

10.	The Contractor agrees to provide to the Divisional Contract Manager, on an annual 
basis, if requested, information regarding its client population served under this 
Contract by race, color, national origin or disability.

11.	This Contract may be terminated in whole or part:

		a)  by the Department upon five (5) calendar days written notice for cause or 
documented unsatisfactory performance,

		b)  by the Department upon  fifteen (15) calendar days written notice of the 
loss of funding or reduction of funding for the stated Contractor services as 
described in Appendix B, 

		c)  by either party without cause upon thirty (30) calendar days written notice 
to the other Party, unless a longer period is specified in Appendix A.

	In the event of termination, all finished or unfinished documents, data, studies, 
surveys, drawings, models, maps, photographs, and reports or other material 
prepared by Contractor under this contract shall, at the option of the Department, 
become the property of the Department.  

	In the event of termination, the Contractor, upon receiving the termination notice, 
shall immediately cease work and refrain from purchasing contract related items 
unless otherwise instructed by the Department. 

	The Contractor shall be entitled to receive reasonable compensation as determined 
by the Department in its sole discretion for any satisfactory work completed on such 
documents and other materials that  are usable to the Department.  Whether such 
work is satisfactory and usable is determined by the Department in its sole 
discretion.
	
	Should the Contractor cease conducting business, become insolvent, make a general 
assignment for the benefit of creditors, suffer or permit the appointment of a receiver 
for its business or assets, or shall avail itself of, or become subject to any proceeding 
under the Federal Bankruptcy Act or any other statute of any state relating to 
insolvency or protection of the rights of creditors, then at the option of the 
Department, this Contract shall terminate and be of no further force and effect. 
Contractor shall notify the Department immediately of such events. 

12.	Any notice required or permitted under this Contract shall be effective upon receipt 
and may be hand delivered with receipt requested or by registered or certified mail 
with return receipt requested.  Either Party may change its address for notices and 
official formal correspondence upon five (5) days written notice to the other.

13.	In the event of amendments to current Federal or State laws which nullify any 
term(s) or provision(s) of this Contract, the remainder of the Contract will remain 
unaffected.

14.	This Contract shall not be altered, changed, modified or amended except by written 
consent of all Parties to the Contract.

15.	The Contractor shall not enter into any subcontract for any portion of the services 
covered by this Contract without obtaining prior written approval of the Department.  
Any such subcontract shall be subject to all the conditions and provisions of this 
Contract.  The approval requirements of this paragraph do not extend to the purchase 
of articles, supplies, equipment, rentals, leases and other day-to-day operational 
expenses in support of staff or facilities providing the services covered by this 
Contract.  

16.	This entire Contract between the Contractor and the Department is composed of 
these several pages and the attached:

				Appendix  A - Divisional Requirements

				Appendix  B - Services Description

				Appendix  C - Contract Budget

				Appendix …….

17.	This Contract shall be interpreted and any disputes resolved according to the Laws 
of the State of Delaware. Except as may be otherwise provided in this contract, all 
claims, counterclaims, disputes and other matters in question between the 
Department and Contractor arising out of or relating to this Contract or the breach 
thereof will be decided by arbitration if the parties hereto mutually agree, or in a 
court of competent jurisdiction within the State of Delaware.



18.	In the event Contractor is successful in an action under the antitrust laws of the 
United States and/or the State of Delaware against a vendor, supplier, subcontractor, 
or other party who provides particular goods or services to the Contractor that 
impact the budget for this Contract, Contractor agrees to reimburse the State of 
Delaware, Department of Health and Social Services for the pro-rata portion of the 
damages awarded that are attributable to the goods or services used by the 
Contractor to fulfill the requirements of this Contract. In the event Contractor refuses 
or neglects after reasonable written notice by the Department to bring such antitrust 
action, Contractor shall be deemed to have assigned such action to the Department.

19.	Contractor covenants that it presently has no interest and shall not acquire any 
interests, direct or indirect, that would conflict in any manner or degree with the 
performance of this Contract.  Contractor further covenants that in the performance 
of this contract, it shall not employ any person having such interest.

20.	Contractor covenants that it has not employed or retained any company or person 
who is working primarily for the Contractor, to solicit or secure this agreement, by 
improperly influencing the Department or any of its employees in any professional 
procurement process; and, the Contractor has not paid or agreed to pay any person, 
company, corporation, individual or firm, other than a bona fide employee working 
primarily for the Contractor, any fee, commission, percentage, gift or any other 
consideration contingent upon or resulting from the award or making of this 
agreement.  For the violation of this provision, the Department shall have the right to 
terminate the agreement without liability and, at its discretion, to deduct from the 
contract price, or otherwise recover, the full amount of such fee, commission, 
percentage, gift or consideration.

21.	The Department shall have the unrestricted authority to publish, disclose, distribute 
and otherwise use, in whole or in part, any reports, data, or other materials prepared 
under this Contract. Contractor shall have no right to copyright any material 
produced in whole or in part under this Contract. Upon the request of the 
Department, the Contractor shall execute additional documents as are required to 
assure the transfer of such copyrights to the Department.  

	If the use of any services or deliverables is prohibited by court action based on a 
U.S. patent or copyright infringement claim, Contractor shall, at its own expense, 
buy for the Department the right to continue using the services or deliverables or 
modify or replace the product with no material loss in use, at the option of the 
Department.

22.	Contractor agrees that no information obtained pursuant to this Contract may be 
released in any form except in compliance with applicable laws and policies on the 
confidentiality of information and except as necessary for the proper discharge of the 
Contractor’s obligations under this Contract. 


23.	Waiver of any default shall not be deemed to be a waiver of any subsequent default.  
Waiver or breach of any provision of this Contract shall not be deemed to be a 
waiver of any other or subsequent breach and shall not be construed to be a 
modification of the terms of the Contract unless stated to be such in writing, signed 
by authorized representatives of all parties and attached to the original Contract.

24. 	If the amount of this contract listed in Paragraph C2 is over $100,000, the 
Contractor, by their signature in Section E, is representing that the Firm and/or its 
Principals, along with its subcontractors and assignees under this agreement,  are not 
currently subject to either suspension or debarment from Procurement and Non-
Procurement activities by the Federal Government.


C)  Financial Requirements


1.	The rights and obligations of each Party to this Contract are not effective and no 
Party is bound by the terms of this contract unless, and until, a validly executed 
Purchase Order is approved by the Secretary of Finance and received by Contractor, 
if required by the State of Delaware Budget and Accounting Manual, and all policies 
and procedures of the Department of Finance have been met.  The obligations of the 
Department under this Contract are expressly limited to the amount of any approved 
Purchase Order.  The State will not be liable for expenditures made or services 
delivered prior to Contractor's receipt of the Purchase Order.

2.	Total payments under this Contract shall not exceed $ ______ in accordance with 
the budget presented in Appendix C.  Payment will be made upon receipt of an 
itemized invoice from the Contractor in accordance with the payment schedule, if 
any.  The contractor or vendor must accept full payment by procurement (credit) 
card and or conventional check and/or other electronic means at the State’s option, 
without imposing any additional fees, costs or conditions.  Contractor is responsible 
for costs incurred in excess of the total cost of this Contract and the Department is 
not responsible for such costs.

3.	The Contractor is solely responsible for the payment of all amounts due to all 
subcontractors and suppliers of goods, materials or services which may have been 
acquired by or provided to the Contractor in the performance of this contract. The 
Department is not responsible for the payment of such subcontractors or suppliers.

4.	The Contractor shall not assign the Contract or any portion thereof without prior 
written approval of the Department and subject to such conditions and revisions as 
the Department may deem necessary.  No such approval by the Department of any 
assignment shall be deemed to provide for the incurrence of any obligations of the 
Department in addition to the total agreed upon price of the Contract.



5.	Contractor shall maintain books, records, documents and other evidence directly 
pertinent to performance under this Contract in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles and practices.  Contractor shall also maintain the financial 
information and data used by Contractor in the preparation of support of its bid or 
proposal.  Contractor shall retain this information for a period of five (5) years from 
the date services were rendered by the Contractor.  Records involving matters in 
litigation shall be retained for one (1) year following the termination of such 
litigation.  The Department shall have access to such books, records, documents, and 
other evidence for the purpose of inspection, auditing, and copying during normal 
business hours of the Contractor after giving reasonable notice.  Contractor will 
provide facilities for such access and inspection.

6.	The Contractor agrees that any submission by or on behalf of the Contractor of any 
claim for payment by the Department shall constitute certification by the Contractor 
that the services or items for which payment is claimed were actually rendered by 
the Contractor or its agents,  and that all information submitted in support of the 
claims is true, accurate, and complete.

7.	The cost of any Contract audit disallowances resulting from the examination of the 
Contractor's financial records will be borne by the Contractor.  Reimbursement to 
the Department for disallowances shall be drawn from the Contractor's own 
resources and not charged to Contract costs or cost pools indirectly charging 
Contract costs.

8.	When the Department desires any addition or deletion to the deliverables or a 
change in the services to be provided under this Contract, it shall so notify the 
Contractor. The Department will develop a Contract Amendment authorizing said 
change. The Amendment shall state whether the change shall cause an alteration in 
the price or time required by the Contractor for any aspect of its performance under 
the Contract. Pricing of changes shall be consistent with those prices or costs 
established within this Contract. Such amendment shall not be effective until 
executed by all Parties pursuant to Paragraph B 14.

D)  Miscellaneous Requirements


1.	If applicable, the Contractor agrees to adhere to the requirements of DHSS Policy 
Memorandum # 46, (PM # 46, effective 5/23/97), and divisional procedures 
regarding the reporting and investigation of suspected abuse, neglect, mistreatment, 
misappropriation of property and significant injury of residents/clients receiving 
services. The policy and procedures are included as Appendix _____ to this 
Contract. It is understood that adherence to this policy includes the development of 
appropriate procedures to implement the policy and ensuring staff receive 
appropriate training on the policy requirements. The Contractor’s procedures must 
include the position(s) responsible for the PM46 process in the provider agency.  
Documentation of staff training on PM46 must be maintained by the Contractor.

2.	The Contractor, including its parent company and its subsidiaries, and any 
subcontractor, including its parent company and subsidiaries, agree to comply with 
the provisions of  29 Del. Code, Chapter 58: “Laws Regulating the Conduct of 
Officers and Employees of the State,” and in particular with Section 5805 (d): “Post 
Employment Restrictions.”

3.	When required by Law, Contractor shall conduct child abuse and adult abuse registry 
checks and obtain service letters  in accordance with 19 Del. Code Section 708; and 
11 Del. Code, Sections 8563 and 8564.  Contractor shall not employ individuals 
with adverse registry findings in the performance of this contract.




E)  Authorized Signatures:



For the Contractor:						       For the Department:



________________						        __________________
Name								         Vincent P. Meconi	
					        			          Secretary

________________						        _________________
Title								        Date


________________					                   For the Division:
Date


								       __________________
							                    Director


								        __________________
								        Date
									


 Appendix 

D.	Website Links

*	DHSS Information Technology Standards
http://www.dhss.delaware.gov/dhss/dms/repstats.html
*	State of Delaware Web Standards 
http://www.state.de.us/sos/gic/information/webstandards.shtml
*	DTI Executive Sponsor Reporting Standards and Change Management 
Standards
 http://dti.delaware.gov/majorproj/majorproj.shtml. 
*	Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) web 
site
http://www.samhsa.gov/
*	SAMHSA National Outcome Measures (NOMS)  web site
http://www.samhsa.gov/
*	DSAMH website
http://www.dhss.delaware.gov/dhss/dsamh/



Appendix 

E.	Key Position Resume 




Key Position Resume


Name:					Proposed Project Position:				

Number of years experience in the proposed position:				

Number of years experience in this field of work:					

Detail Training/Education
(Repeat the format below for as many degrees/certificates as are relevant to this 
proposal. Dates between training/education may overlap.)

Degree/Certificate				Dates of Training/Education

										

										

										

										

										



Detail Experience
(Repeat the format below for as many jobs/projects as are relevant to this 
proposal.  Dates between jobs/projects may overlap.)
  
Job/Project:						Position:				

From Date:						To Date:				

Description of the tasks this person performed in this job/project.  Detail any state 
or government planning projects and specify the role of the person on each 
project



Appendix 

F.	Project Cost Forms


F1. Project Costs by Deliverables & Milestones
CCIS Deliverable & Milestone Cost Schedule
Phase
Project Deliverables & Milestones 
Deliverable 
Cost
Phase 
Cost
Holdback
Vendor 
Payment
State 
Share
Projected 
Date
Actual Date 
Approved
Phase 1
Deliverable 1: Detailed Project Workplan

 

Deliverable 2: Deliverable Document Templates



State Approval of Phase 1 (M1)






Phase 2
Deliverable 3: Enrollment and Eligibility Module

 

Deliverable 4: Admissions and Registration Module



Deliverable 5: Client Assessment Module



Deliverable 6: Treatment Planning Module



Deliverable 7: Clinical Documentation Module



State Approval of Phase 2 (M2)





 
Phase 3
Deliverable 8: Order Entry Module

 

Deliverable 9: Charge Capture Module



Deliverable10: Reporting Module



Deliverable 11: Care Management Module



Deliverable 12: Pharmacy Module/Interface



State Approval of Phase 3 (M3)





 
Phase 4
Deliverable 13: Clinical Care Delivery Module



Deliverable 14: Case Management Module



Approval of Phase 4 (M4)






Phase 5
Deliverable 15: Clinical Support Module



Deliverable 16: Results Reporting Module



Deliverable 17: Minimum Data Set (LTC Clients) 
Module



Deliverable 18: Radiology Module



Approval of Phase 5 (M5)






Phase 6
Deliverable 19: Laboratory Module



Deliverable 20: Client Scheduling Module



Deliverable 21: Patient Accounting/Trust Module



Deliverable 22: Substance Abuse Contractor Module



Approval of Phase 6 (M6)






Phase 7
Deliverable 23: Acceptance in Production of All 
Delivered Modules
 
 

Deliverable 24: Ninety (90) Day Warranty Period



State Approval of Phase 5 and Entire Project, Including 
Holdback From Prior Phases (M7)
N/A
N/A



 
Total Cost



 















Holdback Percent
10.00%







State Share Percent
100%








The Total Cost shown in Schedule F1 must include all costs (except out year costs) that the selected vendor will be paid by 
DHSS.  If specialized hardware or software will be provided by the vendor, it must be included as a deliverable in the above 
schedule.
The modules listed above are those described in the RFP.  If a vendor’s COTS solution provides the same functionality as descried 
in the RFP, but organizes this functionality in a different combination of modules, the vendor should show its own organization of 
modules in the above schedule and in Schedules F3 and F4.

Milestone Cost Breakdown
*	M1 = Total Cost for Phase 1 deliverables – 10% holdback
*	M2 = Total Cost for Phase 2 deliverables – 10% holdback
*	M3 = Total Cost for Phase 3 deliverables – 10% holdback
*	M4 = Total Cost for Phase 4 deliverables – 10% holdback
*	M5 = Total Cost for Phase 5 deliverables – 10% holdback
*	M6 = Total Cost for Phase 6 deliverables – 10% holdback
*	M7 = M1 + M2 + M3 + M4 + M5 + M6 holdbacks

Costs for each task/deliverable listed must be specified along with the total cost of all tasks/deliverables in each specified phase.  
Please check all figures for accuracy.

Contractor may invoice for milestone payments upon formal approval by the Division and IRM.

Cost Cap 
The Total Cost from Schedule F1 cannot exceed $1,830,000.


F2. Schedule of Rates for Project Staff
Vendor is to list the fully loaded hourly rate for each person bid.  These rates will be 
binding and will be used to estimate costs in the event of a change in project scope.  A 
fully loaded hourly rate is an hourly rate that encompasses all costs to the vendor for 
providing additional services to the state as necessitated by for additional tasks not 
covered under the scope of this contract.  Costs included in this rate would be salary, 
overhead, lodging, travel, supplies, incidentals, etc. This rate would be used to apply 
against the hours estimated for each additional task proposed such that Task Hours * 
Rate = Task Cost.

Job Title
			Name
Fully Loaded 
Hourly Rate







































































F3	Software Licensing Schedule
Module Name
Number 
of 
Licenses 
Percent 
Customization
Deliverable 3: Enrollment and Eligibility Module


Deliverable 4: Admissions and Registration Module


Deliverable 5: Client Assessment Module


Deliverable 6: Treatment Planning Module


Deliverable 7: Clinical Documentation Module


Deliverable 8: Order Entry Module


Deliverable 9: Charge Capture Module


Deliverable10: Reporting Module


Deliverable 11: Care Management Module


Deliverable 12: Pharmacy Module/Interface


Deliverable 13: Clinical Care Delivery Module


Deliverable 14: Case Management Module


Deliverable 15: Clinical Support Module


Deliverable 16: Results Reporting Module


Deliverable 17: Minimum Data Set (LTC Clients) Module


Deliverable 18: Radiology Module


Deliverable 19: Laboratory Module


Deliverable 20: Client Scheduling Module


Deliverable 21: Patient Accounting/Trust Module


Deliverable 22: Substance Abuse Contractor Module





F4	Out year Software Support and Maintenance Cost Schedule
Out year support costs are to be listed in the following schedules for each module.  
Support and maintenance costs are capped at a 2% inflation rate per year. Out year 
support and maintenance costs will be taken into effect in determining the 
Appropriateness of Solution Score.  Year 1 is defined as the first 12 months after the 
expiration of the 90 day warranty period.

Support Costs
Module Name
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Deliverable 3: Enrollment and 
Eligibility Module





Deliverable 4: Admissions and 
Registration Module





Deliverable 5: Client Assessment 
Module





Deliverable 6: Treatment Planning 
Module





Deliverable 7: Clinical 
Documentation Module





Deliverable 8: Order Entry Module





Deliverable 9: Charge Capture 
Module





Deliverable10: Reporting Module





Deliverable 11: Care Management 
Module





Deliverable 12: Pharmacy 
Module/Interface





Deliverable 13: Clinical Care 
Delivery Module





Deliverable 14: Case Management 
Module





Deliverable 15: Clinical Support 
Module





Deliverable 16: Results Reporting 
Module





Deliverable 17: Minimum Data Set 
(LTC Clients) Module





Deliverable 18: Radiology Module





Deliverable 19: Laboratory Module





Deliverable 20: Client Scheduling 
Module





Deliverable 21: Patient 
Accounting/Trust Module





Deliverable 22: Substance Abuse 
Contractor Module





Total






Maintenance Costs
Estimate of the number of hours required to apply the DHSS 
 
customization features to new releases ____________


Year 1 single fully loaded hourly rate which will apply to this 
 
work, as well as to future customization ____________


F5.	State Purchased Third Party Software Schedule
List all third party software that the State is responsible for purchasing for use after 
implementation. This includes State developer licenses as well as user licenses. The 
State is not responsible for purchasing vendor developer licenses.  Only new software or 
additional licenses for existing software being proposed for this project will be listed 
here. If the proposed software solution comprises multiple separately-costed modules, 
please list them separately in the following Schedule. 

Software Description/Name
Required 
Version
Number of 
Licenses
















Total Estimated State Purchased Third Party Software Cost __________________

The State will purchase the above items from a third party, not the selected vendor.  
They should not be included in Schedule F1 and will not impact the cost cap.


F6. State Purchased Hardware Schedule
This is a hardware summary cost schedule. Only new hardware or upgrades to existing 
hardware being proposed for this project will be listed here. 

Hardware Description/Name
Quantity


















Total Estimated State Purchased Hardware Cost __________________
The State will purchase the above items from a third party, not the selected vendor.  
They should not be included in Schedule F1 and will not impact the cost cap.




Appendix 

G.	Mandatory (Pass/Fail) Submission Requirements Checklist



Mandatory (Pass/Fail) Submission Requirements Checklist

Mandatory Submission Requirement
RFP     
Section
Complianc
e Y or N          
The bid is submitted no later than the closing date and time
6.1.2

The bid is submitted in separate sealed volumes containing the 
Technical and Business proposals
6.1

The correct number of copies of each proposal is submitted
6.1

Each proposal volume is labeled correctly
6.1

Proposal conditions are valid for 180 days from the deadline date 
for proposal submission
6.2.1

The proposal contains a single solution in terms of this project
6.1.10

Bidder/Proposed Subcontractor has appropriate project 
experience
6.2.7

Transmittal Letter submitted on official business letterhead and 
signed by an authorized representative
6.2.1

Proposal CD’s have been scanned and are free from viruses and 
other malicious software.
6.1

Bidder Agrees to Comply with the provisions specified in the 
General Terms and Conditions 
Appendix A

Technical proposal is submitted with a duly signed and dated 
copy of the Certification/Statement of Compliance 
Appendix B

Completed Project Cost Forms 
Appendix F

Total project cost does not exceed cost cap
Appendix F

Firm fixed price contract proposed
7.2

Technical proposal is submitted with a completed, duly signed 
and dated copy of the Submission Requirements Checklist 
6.2.2 & 
Appendix G

Completed State of Delaware Contracts Disclosure 
Appendix H

Completed Crosswalk of RFP Section 4 
6.2.5 & 
Appendix I

Completed Bidders Signature Form 
Appendix J

Project timeline does not exceed specified project length
7.3

Compliance with HIPAA Regulations & Standards 
4.3 

Proposal includes required resumes
6.2.6

All exceptions to State policies and standards are addressed in 
the Technical Proposal.
4.4

The latest releases of all vendor and third-party software 
included in the proposed Clinical Care solution is in production at 
two separate client sites
2.3

MCI/SI integration is included
1.2

Customization to the COTS software for the CCIS must not 
exceed 15%


All 9 mandatory modules are included
4.12




_________________________________________
Signature of Authorized Representative


_________________________________________
Title / Company

_______________
Date


Appendix 

H.	State of Delaware Contracts Disclosure



 State of Delaware Contracts Disclosure

Vendor/Predecessor 
Firm Name
State Department 
and Division
Contact Name, Address and 
Phone Number
Period of 
Performance
Contract 
Number
Amount
Sample Vendor Firm Name
DHSS \ DMS
Contact Name                            
1901 N DuPont Highway            
New Castle, DE 19720               
302.999.9999
01/01/2002 –
12/31/2002
PSC-999999
$100,000


































Bidder shall list all contracts awarded to it or its predecessor firm(s) by the State of Delaware during the last three (3) years, by State 
Department, Division, Contact Person (with address/phone number), period of performance, contract number and amount. The 
Evaluation/Selection Review Committee will consider these additional references and may contact each of these sources. 
Information regarding bidder performance gathered from these sources may be included in the Committee's deliberations and 
factored in the final scoring of the bid. Failure to list any contract as required by this paragraph may be grounds for immediate 
rejection of the bid.

List contracts in the format specified.  Include those contracts whose period of performance has been within the past three (3) years 
in addition to those awarded within this timeframe.  Contracts with amendments only have to be listed once.  If a vendor has had no 
contracts within this timeframe, enter “No contracts to specify” under Vendor/Predecessor Firm Name in the first row of the table.



Appendix 

I.	Crosswalk of RFP Section 4



Crosswalk of RFP Section 4 

RFP Section
Proposal 
Section 
Number
Proposal 
Page 
Number
4 Contractor Responsibilities/Project Requirements


4.1 Staffing


4.2 Project Management


4.3 Requirement To Comply With HIPAA Regulations and Standards


4.4 Requirement to Comply with Policies and Standards


…


4.14 Technical Approach [1 through 13]




This is a template for the crosswalk of Section 4 in the RFP.  It links the numbered RFP sections to the sections and page numbers 
of the bidder’s proposal.  Bidders are required to fill out this crosswalk completely for each numbered section in Section 4.



Appendix 

J.	Bidders Signature Form





 

DELAWARE HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES
REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL

BIDDERS SIGNATURE FORM
                                                                                                               
NAME OF BIDDER:									
SIGNATURE OF AUTHORIZED PERSON:							
TYPE IN NAME OF AUTHORIZED PERSON:						
TITLE OF AUTHORIZED PERSON:							
STREET NAME AND NUMBER:								
CITY, STATE, & ZIP CODE:								
CONTACT PERSON:									
TELEPHONE NUMBER:									
FAX NUMBER:										
DATE:											
BIDDER’S FEDERAL EMPLOYERS IDENTIFICATION NUMBER:				
DELIVERY DAYS/COMPLETION TIME:							
F.O.B.:											
TERMS:											

THE FOLLOWING MUST BE COMPLETED BY THE VENDOR:

AS CONSIDERATION FOR THE AWARD AND EXECUTION BY THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
AND SOCIAL SERVICES OF THIS CONTRACT, THE (COMPANY NAME)				
HEREBY GRANTS, CONVEYS, SELLS, ASSIGNS, AND TRANSFERS TO THE STATE OF DELAWARE 
ALL OF ITS RIGHTS, TITLE AND INTEREST IN AND TO ALL KNOWN OR UNKNOWN CAUSES OF 
ACTION IT PRESENTLY HAS OR MAY NOW HEREAFTER ACQUIRE UNDER THE ANTITRUST LAWS 
OF THE UNITED STATES AND THE STATE OF DELAWARE, RELATING THE PARTICULAR GOODS 
OR SERVICES PURCHASED OR ACQUIRED BY THE DELAWARE HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES 
DEPARTMENT, PURSUANT TO THIS CONTRACT.




Appendix 

K.	Office of Minority and Women Business Enterprise Self-Certification Tracking 
Form




 

OFFICE OF MINORITY AND WOMEN BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
SELF-CERTIFICATION TRACKING FORM
If your firm wishes to be considered for one of the classifications listed below, this page must be 
signed, notarized and returned with your proposal.
COMPANY NAME_______________________________________________________
NAME OF AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE (Please print)
________________________________________________________________________
SIGNATURE____________________________________________________________
COMPANY 
ADDRESS______________________________________________________________
TELEPHONE #__________________________________________________________
FAX #__________________________________________________________________
EMAILADDRESS________________________________________________________
FEDERAL EI# __________________________________________________________
STATE OF DE BUSINESS LIC#____________________________________________
Note:  Signature of the authorized representative MUST be of an individual who legally may 
enter his/her organization into a formal contract with the State of Delaware, Delaware Health 
and Social Services.
Organization Classifications (Please circle)
Women Business Enterprise (WBE)		Yes/No
Minority Business Enterprise (MBE)	Yes/No
PLEASE CHECK ONE---CORPORATION ______	PARTNERSHIP______INDIVIDUAL 
_______
________________________________________________________________________
For certification (WBE), (MBE), (DBE) please apply to Office of Minority & Women Business 
Enterprise Phone #’ (302) 739-7830 X34  (Mary Schrieber) 
Fax# (302) 739-7839     Certification #____________ Certifying Agency____________
http://www.state.de.us/omwbe
SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED BEFORE ME THIS ______________DAY OF 
___________20________
NOTARY PUBLIC_________________________MY COMMISION EXPIRES 
____________________
CITY OF ___________________________COUNTY OF _________________STATE 
OF__________________


Definitions
The following definitions are from the State Office of Minority and Women Business Enterprise.

Women Owned Business Enterprise (WBE):
At least 51% is owned by a women, or in the case of a publicly owned enterprise, a business 
enterprise in which at least 51% of the voting stock is owned by women; or any business 
enterprise that is approved or certified as such for purposes of participation in contracts subject 
to women-owned business enterprise requirements involving federal programs and federal 
funds.

Minority Business Enterprise (MBE):
At least 51% is owned by minority group members; or in the case of a publicly owned 
enterprise, a business enterprise in which at least 51% of the voting stock is owned by minority 
group members; or any business enterprise that is approved or certified as such for purposes of 
participation in contracts subjects to minority business enterprises requirements involving 
federal programs and federal funds.

Corporation: 
An artificial legal entity treated as an individual, having rights and liabilities distinct from those of 
the persons of its members, and vested with the capacity to transact business, within the limits 
of the powers granted by law to the entity.

Partnership:
An agreement under which two or more persons agree to carry on a business, sharing in the 
profit or losses, but each liable for losses to the extent of his or her personal assets.

Individual:  
Self-explanatory

For Certification in one of above bidder must contract:
Mary Schrieber
Office of Minority and Women Business Enterprise
(302) 739-7830 X 34
Fax (302) 739-7839



Appendix 

L.	Bidder Project Experience



 
Bidder Project Experience



Client

Contact Name

Telephone No.

Location Street 
Address/City 
State/ZIP

Location City/State

Type of Facility



Comparable Project 
Experience



Current Status
(WIP/Complete)

Original Budget

Completed Budget



Original Schedule

Completed Schedule



Comments:

















Use one page per client. All clients will be used as references and all projects must be 
completed or work in progress. For projects in progress, state the estimated final budget and 
schedule dates based on current status.  The Contact must be an administrative or managerial 
customer reference familiar with the bidder’s performance.




Appendix 

M.	List of all Relevant Forms and Reports



Preliminary Client Assessment
Forms & Reports
Enrollment & Eligibility
?	Client Application
?	Psychiatric Assessment
?	Inter-agency Transfer
?	Detox Forms
?	EEU Forms

Admission & Registration
?	Consumer Reporting Form
?	Advanced Directive
?	Acknowledgement of Privacy Practices
?	Physical Examination Form
?	Nursing Assessment Form (DPC only)

Client Scheduling
?	Unit Calendar 
?	Therapy Schedule 

Client Assessment
?	Psychiatric Assessment
?	Annual Psychiatric Reassessment
?	Seclusion or Restraint Nursing Assessment
?	Social Assessment
?	Pain Assessment
?	Therapeutic Recreation Assessment
?	Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale
?	Psychological Assessment

Minimum Data Set (MDS) for LTC 
Clients
?	MDS Assessment Form 
 Care Plans/Treatment Plans
Forms & Reports
Treatment/Care  Plans
?	Initial Treatment Plan
?	Master Treatment Plan
?	Treatment Plan Update
?	1 : 1 Treatment Plan

 Caregiver Clinical Documentation
Forms & Reports
Nursing Care Delivery
?	Nursing Observation Record
?	Treatment Record
?	Vital Signs Record
?	Immunization Record
?	Intake & Output Record
?	Diabetic Record
?	Special Precaution Flow Sheet
?	Prompted Voiding Worksheet

Clinical Documentation
?	Progress Notes
?	Interdisciplinary Group Therapy Documentation 
Sheet

Pharmacy
?	Med Card
?	Pharmacy Data Sheet
?	Medication Education Workshop
?	Medication Administration Record
?	Medical Consent Form
Radiology
?	DPC Radiology Requisition 

Laboratory
?	LabCorp Requisition
?	Redwood Toxicology Laboratory Requisition

Therapy & Rehabilitation
?	Interdisciplinary Group Therapy Documentation 
Sheet

Social Services
?	Social Assessment
?	Discharge Fact Sheet
?	Money Request Form 

Case Management
?	Progress Note
?	Work List
?	Client Service Plan
Clinical Support
?	ORYX Report
?	Medicare Tracking Report
?	Medication Error Report
Crisis Intervention
?	Initial Contact Assessment
?	Crisis Treatment Plan
?	Progress Note
  Physician Support
Forms & Reports
Order Entry
?	Doctor’s Order Sheet
?	Consultation Request and Report
?	Redwood Toxicology Laboratory Requisition
?	Other Lab Requisitions

Results Reporting
?	Clinical Laboratory Reports
?	Radiology Report
?	Medication Administration Reports
?	Dietary Reports

  Non-Clinical Administrative 
Support
Forms & Reports
 Charge Capture
?	Service Ticket 
Patient Accounting/Patient Trust 


?	N/A

Staff Scheduling
?	Staff Schedule
?	Weekly Schedule by Unit
?	Daily Attendance Sheet




 1.3.6 Outcome/Performance 
Measurement
Forms & Reports
Reporting
?	Census By Unit
?	Census By Attending Physician
?	Sample DataMart Reports
?	CRF Report
?	Product Line Report


				
			
		Table of Contents				
	124		
Clinical Care Information System RFP		Project Overview
Clinical Care Information System RFP		DHSS Program and System Overview 
Clinical Care Information System RFP		State Responsibilities
Clinical Care Information System RFP		Contractor Responsibilities/Project Requirements
Clinical Care Information System RFP		Proposal Evaluation/Contractor Selection
Clinical Care Information System RFP		Bidder Instructions 
Clinical Care Information System RFP		Terms and Conditions 
RFP Name RFP		Appendices
Clinical Care Information System RFP		Appendices
