
                                              Release No. 0546.96

                                    Laura Trivers  (202) 720-4623
                                                ltrivers@usda.gov
                                    Claiborn Crain (202) 720-1363

CLINTON ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCES GRANTS FOR RURAL SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS
Funds Will Connect Rural Facilities to Information Superhighway

     WASHINGTON, Oct. 9, 1996--Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman today
announced $7.5 million in grants to help rural schools and health care
facilities connect hundreds of thousands of rural residents to the
information superhighway.  The grants will serve rural residents in 21
states and one U.S. territory.

     "Today's investment helps create literally thousands of on-ramps to the
information superhighway -- ensuring that rural areas are included in the
information technological revolution that is sweeping this nation," Glickman
said. "Through these grants, USDA will help accomplish the Clinton
Administration's goal of having a computer in every classroom of every
school in every state in our country.  These awards will bring about
dramatic changes for the people who call rural America home.  Children will
have access to more advanced school subjects, they will be computer literate
-- and therefore prepared for the competitive, higher paying jobs and
careers of the 21st century."

     The Telecommunications Act of 1996, signed by President Clinton on
February 8, 1996, provides customers with more choices and has spurred the
development of new services.  The law also ensures that all Americans,
especially rural Americans, have access to this burgeoning information
superhighway.

     "For example, because of  today's grants students in remote rural areas
will be able to take advanced math and science classes -- taught at a state
university and linked to their school -- classes and subjects that otherwise
would be unavailable to them.  And a doctor in a rural town can consult
about an ill patient with specialists at research hospitals -- providing
state of the art, yet close-by, care for patients who might otherwise spend
precious time and money to travel to far away hospitals."

     These grants will provide new education opportunities to 178,000
students in 154 schools and universities and will enhance medical care using
modern telecommunications facilities at 62 medical sites serving 1.7 million
people.  Applicants must also supplement these federal funds with either
state, local or private money to create a stronger, more community-supported
project.

     This is the fourth year of this competitive grant program administered
by the Rural Utilities Service, an agency of  USDA.  Since 1993 and
including today's announcement, this program has provided 119 grants
totaling $35 million to rural schools, hospitals and medical clincis in 39
states and one territory.

     In addition to the grant program, in FY 1997, RUS will also be able to
provide loans to help meet the growing demands for such information
technology projects in rural areas.

     Summaries of the grants follow.

                                #

NOTE: USDA news releases and media advisories are available on the Internet.
Access the USDA Home Page on the World Wide Web at http://www.usda.gov


             United States Department of Agriculture
                     Rural Utilities Service
         Distance Learning and Telemedicine Grant Program
               Project Summaries, Fiscal Year 1996


Location:  Birmingham, Alabama    Applicant:  Carraway Methodist Health
System       $285,000

     The Carraway Methodist Health System is a not-for-profit major medical
system serving the northwest corridor of Alabama.  CMHS has committed to
place a rural medical clinic staffed with a nurse practitioner in the town
of Sulligent, Lamar County.  By creating a widespread telemedicine and
distance learning network, the Community Network for Education and
Telemedicine (CNET), CMHS will address the most glaring of medical
underservice needs of northwest Alabama.  An RUS grant award will provide
CMHS with the funding to purchase the equipment necessary  to provide for
telemedicine delivery of medical services and teleconferencing for medical
education.


Location:  Fort Yukon, AK     Applicant:  Council of Athabascan Tribal
Government    $317,729

        The Council of Athabascan Tribal Governments will coordinate with the
University of Alaska Fairbanks Interior-Aleutian Campus and AT&T Alascom to
implement a project using RUS grant funds to create a system to deliver
critically needed educational and medical services to one of the most remote
and underserved regions of the U.S. by connecting this remote area of Alaska
and the world via the Internet. The project is intended to be used by tribal
members and villagers, village government councils and employees, community
health aid providers, health professionals, rural human services/prevention
workers, degree programs and adult community education university students.


Location:  Tuscon, AZ      Applicant:  Arizona Board of Regents University of
Arizona  $141,150

        For years Nogales has struggled to recruit and retain all levels for
health care professionals and is formally designated as both a Medically
Underserved Area and a Health Professional Shortage Area by the Arizona
Department of Health Services.  The University of Arizona College of
Medicine will use RUS grant funds for telemedicine equipment to establish
teleconsult and telediagnostics capability at Maricopa Community Health
Center, the major provider of primary care in Nogales.  Through this
telemedicine network, residents of Nogales will have access to the College
of Medicine's 2,709 specialists and sub-specialists.


Location:  Jackson, California  Applicant:  Amador County Unified School
District       $245,000

        For the residents of Amador County, the cost of delivering
accelerated and challenging courses for at-risk students and educational
opportunities for low-income rural adults is difficult due to increased
cirricular demands by the state and projected budget deficits.  The Amador
County Unified School District has proposed to address these issues with a
distance learning project that will connect classrooms in seven rural
schools for the purpose of enhancing educational opportunities.  An RUS
grant will assist in funding the School District's campaign to modernize its
telecommunications system.


Location:  Oroville, CA   Applicant:  Butte Glen Community College District          $336,124

         Butte College, in a collaborative partnership with Shasta College,
Siskiyous College, and Lassen College, will use an RUS grant award to
purchase the necessary equipment to expand, improve, and make affordable the
use of advanced telecommunications, computer networks, and related advance
technologies to rural northern California for the purpose of providing
educational and medical benefits through distance learning and telemedicine
projects.  The proposed project will be designed for both distance learning
and medical teleconferences to rural sites in eight counties in northern
California.


Location:  Pago Pago, American Samo   Applicant:  American Samoa Power
Authority         $138,955

        American Samoa is the most geographically remote of all US insular
Areas.  It is a group of seven islands in the South Pacific Ocean, located
more than 2300 miles from its nearest US neighbor (Hawaii) and is the only
US soil in the Southern Hemisphere.  Its remoteness, size and limited
financial resources have a profound impact on health care and education.
The American Samoa Power Authority will administer a project using RUS grant
funds to create a telecommunications satellite link between the LBJ Tropical
Medical Center and the PEACE SAT Network, in Hawaii, that will provide
access to numerous telemedicine and medical information resources.


Location:    Boise, Idaho  Applicant:  Boise State University
$310,000

        Boise State University has proposed a project that will focus on the
acquisition, development, and redesign of instructional programming to be
used in providing distance learning to one of the most rural areas of Idaho.
An RUS grant has been awarded to BSU to purchase and install
state-of-the-art teleconferencing equipment for delivery of job specific
vocational and applied technology education programs.  The proposed project
will link ten remote school districts located in seven counties using a
real-time interactive instructional telecommunications system.


Location:                  Springfield, Illinois    Applicant:  Lincoln
Land Community College             $336,124

        Lincoln Land Community College serves residents in the largest
(geographically) community college district in the state of Illinois (over
four thousand square miles).  The majority of the district is rural.  LLCC
will use RUS grant funds to purchase and implement a telecommunications
system that will link the Rural Education and Technology Center to the
University of Illinois (Springfield) campus cabling infrastructure, to LLCC
education centers, to local cable TV system, to a terrestrial broadcast TV
system, to satellites, to the State of Illinois compressed video system, and
to the Internet.


Location:   Leon, Iowa          Applicant:  Decatur County Hospital
$245,394

        An RUS grant award will be used by Decatur County  Hospital to allow
for the expansion of health care services and for strengthening the
viability of the rural hospital.  This project involves both distance
learning and telemedicine components. The overall result will be improved
general medicine and mental health services to a seriously underserved and
economically disadvantaged rural population.


Location:  Arkansas City, Kansas    Applicant:  Cowley County Community
College           $283,828

        An RUS grant award will assist the South Central Kansas Rural
Distance Learning Project in overcoming barriers of transportation,
distance, and isolation which limit opportunities for interactive education
and access to information resources.   The project will build upon an
existing closed loop interactive television consortium and expand it by
creating new open-access gateways from the rest of southern Kansas to the
metropolitan area of Wichita -- and eventually to the world.


Location:  Church Point, Louisiana   Applicant:  Acadia-St. Landry
$50,000

        The overall goal of project proposed by Acadia-St.Landry Parish
Hospital is to provide, through teleradiology, outreach health care services
to primarily low income, economically depressed rural areas of southwest
Louisiana that often have difficulty attracting health care professionals.
The RUS grant award will be used to purchase the necessary equipment that
will assist the area in adjusting to the rural marketplace in which they
must compete.


Location:  Columbia, Louisiana  Applicant:  Northeast Louisiana Health
Network              $336,124

        The Northeast Louisiana Health Network, Inc., is a non-profit health
care consortium of ten hospitals based in northeast Louisiana that serves an
area of 9 rural Louisiana parishes with an approximate population of 287,600
people. The RUS grant award will assist the Network's proposed telemedicine
plan by providing ways to fill the service void left by declining state
budgets for public health care and by the inability to attract health care
professionals to much of the project's targeted area.


Location:  Midland, Michigan   Applicant:  MidMichigan Regional Health
System, Inc.        $336,124

        An RUS grant will be used for the project proposed by MidMichigan
Regional Health System to develop a telemedicine network connecting the
computer systems of end-user sites and hubs in the service area for the
purpose of transmitting and speeding communication of patient related
information. The overall goal is to improve the quality, access efficiency,
and cost effectiveness of delivering patient care.


Location:  Marquette, Michigan    Applicant:  Upper Peninsula Health Care
Network         $327,224

        The Upper Peninsula Health Care Network is a consortium that includes
a regional medical center, 13 community hospitals, and a Medicaid management
plan.  The focus of the group is to serve the 314,000 residents of
Michigan's Upper Peninsula through the promotion of managed care networks,
cooperative hospital services, availability of education, access to health
care, and assurance of high professional standards.  The remoteness, sparse
population and severe weather of this area has made access to medical
services and medical education a serious problem.  Helping to solve the
problem, UPHCN will use RUS grant funds to expand the existing network to
five unconnected and isolated health care facilities.


Location:  Arlington, Minnesota            Applicant:  Arlington Municipal
Hospital         $203,756

        Arlington Municipal Hospital, located in south central Minnesota, is
the only remaining hospital serving the rural community of Sibley County.
Rural isolation has created many barriers for health care and challenges for
communities committed to providing quality health care for its residents.
To help knock down these barriers, AMH, utilizing RUS grant funds, will
implement a three component telemedicine plan consisting of:  emergency room
coverage, video conferencing for consultation and continued education, and
teleradiology.

Location:  East Grand Forks, Minnesota    Applicant: Northwest Technical
College           $100,000

        Northwest Technical College is a public institution of higher
education located Minnesota and has proposed a Distance Learning Project in
Licensed Practical Nursing (DL-LPN).  The goal of this project is to develop
instructional programming in practical nursing which will be delivered via
existing telecommunication technology and systems, including Medstar and the
Internet, to end-user sites in North Dakota.  An RUS grant has been awarded
to NTC's project to develop instructional programming in practical nursing
and will be part of an electronically complete associate degree in Practical
Nursing.


Location:  Columbia, Missouri  Applicant:  Boone Hospital Center
$336,124

        The School-Community Telehealth Network of Boone Hospital Center is a
project that creates a partnership between rural hospitals and schools to
address the health care needs of these three Missouri counties.  An RUS
grant award will be utilized to purchase telemedicine and distance learning
equipment necessary to link the hospitals and schools in order to offer
health care and education services currently unavailable to these rural
areas.


Location:   Tupelo, Mississippi      Applicant:  North Mississippi Health
Services, Inc.         $336,124

        North Mississippi Health Services is committed to bringing quality
health care services closer to its medically underserved rural population.
NMHS has produced an affiliation of over 45 medical centers, clinics, and
institutions covering a 30 county service area in northeast Mississippi and
northwest Alabama.  This project is the dream of those rural medical centers
and the residents they serve.  RUS grant funds will enable NMHS to implement
a long-range solution to the problems of serving sparsely populated, rural
areas.


Location:  Roundup, Montana     Applicant:  High Plains Education
$224,135

        The High Plains Education Consortium (HPEC) is an alliance of  rural
school districts in central Montana.  The HPEC network proposes to link five
schools in central Montana with interactive television capabilities for
distance learning.  The applicant intends to use RUS grant funds to purchase
and install ITV equipment in each participating school, utilizing existing
classroom space to accommodate equipment.  This equipment, linked with
telephone company transmission facilities, will allow these schools to share
instructional time for required course offerings that cannot be obtained by
each district at its own cost.


Location:  Havre, Montana   Applicant:  Montana State University -
$278,691

        Seven school districts in rural north central Montana have joined
Montana State University - Northern and make up the West Fiber Optic
Consortium Uniting Schools (West Focus).  RUS grant funds requested for this
project will be used to purchase equipment for Distance Learning Classrooms
and for technical training and assistance for developing distance learning
programs.  By forming a partnership with local telephone cooperatives and
State Universities, the rural schools can afford access to information and
programming using advanced telecommunications.


Location:  Bone, North Carolina   Applicant:  Watauga County Board of
Education          $188,532

        Watauga County's rural isolation and economic disadvantages,
compounded with lack of access to advanced telecommunications technologies,
have left most of the rural students without a model for successful personal
use of the wealth of information available beyond the classroom's
boundaries.  An RUS grant awarded to the Watauga County Board of Education
project "Watauga LEARNS!" will be used to acquire the advanced
telecommunications and computer network infrastructure needed to provide
county-wide connectivity among nine schools and the schools county office.


Location:  Frederick, OK      Applicant:  Southwest Oklahoma Tele-Education
Consortium              $79,000

        The Southwest Oklahoma Tele-Education Consortium (SOTEC) has been
awarded an RUS grant to assist with a proposed interactive television (ITV)
network enabling ten schools to expand curriculums, work together and
explore new teaching methods in a four county area.  The rural communities
in the four county region, particularly the students and teachers, are
expected to benefit from the project from:  shared curriculums; local
technical and higher educational opportunities; and local access to business
conferences and down-linking of business and commerce information such as
global marketing reports, trade information, etc.


Location:  Waynesburg, PA   Applicant:  Green County Vocational-Technical
School           $336,124

        Green County Area Vocational-Technical School, in partnership with a
consortium of 5 Green County School Districts and Waynesburg College, will
use an RUS grant award to establish electronic communication among partners
so that teachers and students located in one rural area can connect with
teachers and students that are located in a different area, as well as be
able to access other information gateways.


Location:  White, South Dakota      Applicant:  Deubrook Area Schools 5-6
$336,124

        This project will benefit the members of the East Central
Interconnect Cooperative, a consortium consisting of six rural schools
districts, one multi-district vocational high school, and South Dakota State
University.  Using RUS grant funding, this project will utilize two-way
interactive audio-video technology to enable the participating districts to
share classes in their elementary and secondary schools.


Location: Irene, SD   Applicant:  SE SD Distance Learning Challenge $336,124

        The Challenge Project -- a consortium of twelve rural K-12 public
schools districts, a rural school cooperative and the School of Education of
the University of South Dakota -- have worked together to bring technology
into their classrooms in spite of limited resources.  An RUS grant, awarded
to the Challenge Project schools, will be used to purchase interactive video
equipment which will enable the schools to use networking technology to
connect classrooms together and provide high-speed access to the Internet.


Location:  Dunlap, Tennessee    Applicant:  Sequatchie County Board of
Education             $51,250

        Sequatchie County is located in southeast Tennessee adjacent to
Hamilton County (Metropolitan Chattanooga Area), and operates a rural school
system with a limited tax base which lacks the financial resources to
address the distance learning needs of all the students. An RUS grant award
will provide funding assistance for the purchase of the computer equipment
which will allow the students at the Sequatchie County Middle School to
experience distance learning through access to the Internet and other
electronic information resources.


Location:  Midland,Texas   Applicant:  Midland College   $336,124

        RUS has awarded a grant to the Distance Learning for Rural West Texas
Project which will provide distance learning opportunities to a vast
underserved rural area.  RUS grant funds will be used to purchase equipment
for interactive video distance learning facilities that would extend Midland
College credit classes (both academic and technical) to the Regional
Technical Training Center (RTTC) in Fort Stockton, Texas, in Pecos County,
and the Crockett County Consolidated School District (CCCSD).


Location:   Uvalde, Texas  Applicant:  Southwest Texas Junior
$335,786

        The capacity for small, rural school districts to address the broad
range of needs and skills necessary to equip students with the skills
necessary to compete in the 21st Century is profoundly limited.  However,
key educational stake-holders in eleven counties in southwest Texas, served
by Southwest Texas Junior College, have gathered together to form the
Southwest Texas Network Consortium (SWTNet). SWTNet has proposed a Televilla
project to address the educational needs of the area's rural students.  RUS
has awarded a grant for the Televilla project which will be used to develop
infrastructure backbone for Internet access and distance learning.


Location:  Cedar City, Utah     Applicant:  Rural Utah Telemedicine
$333,330

        The mission of the Rural Utah Telemedicine Associates is to provide
telemedicine and health care services, health care consultations, and health
care management for the benefit of rural Utah and its rural citizens.  By
implementing a "mobile health clinic" system, many rural communities with
little or no health care providers will be able to receive quality health
care services in their own community for the first time.  RUS grant funds
will help to pay for the mobile clinic that is equipped to provide primary
care as well as specialty consultation via telemedicine technology.

                                   #
