MARCH 1999

U.S. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS
VTDP Annotation TIGER/Line(R) (Also known as the TIGER/Line 1998)

Census TIGER(R) and TIGER/Line(R) are registered trademarks of the
U.S. Bureau of the Census.  

WHAT ARE TIGER/LINE FILES

The TIGER/Line files were created from the Census Bureau's TIGER
(Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing) data base of selected
geographic and cartographic information. TIGER was developed at the Census Bureau to support
the mapping and related geographic activities required by the decennial census and sample survey
programs.  TIGER/Line files are made available to the public and are typically used by people to
provide the digital map base for their Geographic Information System or mapping software.

This CD-ROM does not contain software to display or generate maps.  Nor is the data on this
CD-ROM in the form of a map image.  To create maps with the data on this CD-ROM, one
would typically use a Geographic Information System package or other mapping software.  For
information on how to use the TIGER/Line data with a specific package one should contact the
company that produced the package. For information on companies that sell products that use
TIGER/Line data or that provide various TIGER/Line-related services refer to the "Vendor's
List" on the TIGER Page at the Census Bureau's World Wide Web site described below.

WHAT'S NEW

These TIGER/Line files are produced for use by the states participating in the Census
2000 Redistricting Data Program, Phase 2, the Voting District Project (VTDP) to submit their
voting districts to the U. S. Census Bureau.   The 1998 TIGER/Line files include approved
submissions and updates from Phase 1, the Block Boundary Suggestion Project (BBSP), the 1998
Boundary and Annexation Survey, and other Census Bureau programs
that update the TIGER data base. It is important to note that even though each TIGER/Line file
represents a whole county, all new features in existence may not have been added in this release.
The extent of updates in any given county will vary by program, number of participants, type of
participant, time of participation, and a given participant's degree of participation in a program. 


USING THIS CD-ROM

The 1998 TIGER/Line CD-ROMs contain digital cartographic data files and related documentation.
The files include the counties, parishes, boroughs, census geographic areas, and equivalent entities
for each state (or territory, and so forth) participating in the VTDP program.   The data is
organized in subdirectories by county (or county equivalent) within a state. Each state
subdirectory is named using the two-digit FIPS code and the Post Office abbreviation for
the state (ex. 02_AK for Alaska).  Within the state subdirectory each county file has the name
TGRssccc.ZIP, where the "ss" is the state FIPS code and "ccc" is the county FIPS code.  

The data for each county is stored in this single compressed file that when decompressed results in
up to 17 separate files representing each of the TIGER/Line record types that exist for that
county.  Some counties did not require all of the 17 record types and therefore will have less than
17 files. If the types of data contained in record types 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 and Z are not appropriate for a
given county then the files for those record types will not be included.  The name of each of these
files uses a modification of the above convention (TGRssccc.RTx) where "x" is the Record Type. 
Appendix A of the documentation provides a list of counties and their FIPS codes by state.   

Information on the content of each record type can be found in Chapter 6 of the TIGER/Line
documentation.  Information on decompressing the data files is found below under the heading
"Data Compression".  

The files use the TIGER/Line record formats as described in the accompanying documentation. 
When decompressed they are fixed length ASCII with record separators (carriage return, line
feed).  The CD-ROM is in ISO 9660 format.  Users with PCS will require Microsoft CD-ROM
Extensions Version 2.0 or higher.

ADDITIONAL CONTENTS OF THE CD-ROM:

COUNTSss.TXT

Each CD-ROM contains COUNTSss.TXT files in the subdirectory directory for each state under
the TIGER directory.  The COUNTSss.TXT files show record type file record counts by county
for all states that are included on the compact disk.  Note that all counties are listed for a given
state.  The layout of COUNTSss.TXT is  as follows:

FIPS state code       16:17
FIPS county code    20:22
Creation date           25:30
Record type            33:33
Record Count         36:43

README.TXT

The document that you are presently reading.

DOCUMENTATION

The documentation for the TIGER/Line files is contained in the TECHDOC subdirectory.   The
file name is TIGER98V.PDF and is provided in the PDF format which requires the ADOBE(TM)
Acrobat 3.0 Reader.  We are including the installation software for both the Windows 3.1
(ar16e301.exe) and the Windows 95 (ar32e301.exe) versions of the reader.  They are included
in the TECHDOC/ACROREAD directory.  Choose the appropriate version of this software, copy it to
the hard drive of your computer and run it.  It will install the ADOBE Reader software on your
computer.  When the installation is complete you can view the TIGER/Line documentation by
running the ADOBE Reader and selecting the TIGER98V.PDF file from the "Open" menu.  To get the
ADOBE Reader for other computer platforms visit the ADOBE Web site for the proper software
(http://www.adobe.com).

Windows is a trademark of the Microsoft Corporation.  ADOBE and Acrobat Reader are
trademarks of Adobe Systems Inc.

GARM

The Census Bureau has published a Geographic Areas Reference Manual (GARM) which is
available on this CD-ROM in the TEXTDOC/GARM subdirectory.  This publication describes the
various geographic programs at the Census Bureau and provides definitions of technical terms and
a wealth of background information on the various geographic concepts used by the Census Bureau. 
The manual was produced in ADOBE PDF and is separated into individual chapters to provide
smaller file sizes for easier access.  

DATA COMPRESSION

The TIGER/Line data on this disk has been compressed into an archive file to save space and
reduce the number of disks required for the data.  If the files were not compressed it would
require over 40 CD-ROM disks to hold the data needed to cover the entire United States.   Use
software compatible with PK-ZIP 1.93A or higher to decompress the data.

Info-ZIP's software (Zip, Unzip and related utilities) are examples of packages that can be used. 
The Info-ZIP software is free and can be obtained as source code or executables from various
bulletin boards and on line services software archive sites.  There are versions for many
computer platforms.  One site from which this software can be downloaded is: 
http://www.cdrom.com/pub/infozip/UnZip.html

KNOWN PROBLEMS AND ANOMALIES WITH THIS TIGER/LINE DATA SET:

ADDRESS ANOMALIES IN PUERTO RICO AND QUEENS, N.Y.

The TIGER/Line files contain some address range coverage for Puerto Rico.  However, use of
this information for geocoding purposes may be problematic and the data user should proceed
with caution.  These address ranges are preliminary attempts at using Puerto Rico address ranges
in Census Bureau files.  Due to the lack of software or resources to handle some of the more
unique aspects of addressing in Puerto Rico, the address ranges were entered without the
standard edits and quality checks used in other parts of the United States. Improvements in
software and address standardization for Puerto Rico are expected in the future.  At present,  there
are inconsistencies, overlaps, and duplication of address ranges.  Address ranges may lack alpha
character prefixes or have hyphenated prefixes. The files also lack the community names used in a
four-line address that the U.S. Postal Service requires to avoid duplicate addresses.  Errors in the
reference files, and other factors may limit the usefulness of this product for geocoding purposes. 

Address range data for Queens County, NY in TIGER/Line does not show a consistent use of
hyphenated and non-hyphenated addressing.  The Census Bureau intends to correct this in a future
version of TIGER products.

CALIFORNIA RECORD TYPE C EXTRANEOUS DATA

Due to some technical problems, Alpine (003) and Contra Costa (013) counties will have
additional data in their Record Type C (RT C) file.  The additional data consists of 1990 voting
district and place entity records from adjacent counties in which they had county boundary changes
with since 1990.  For example, Alpine County has all of Amador County's 1990 voting district and
place entity records in RT C.  In addition, there may be additional counties with the same problem
in the state of California or in the United States.  However, the aforementioned counties are the
only ones exhibiting this problem.   The Census Bureau's Geography Division is in the process of
fixing the problem.

ROAD  FEATURE  ANOMALIES

The Census Bureau extracts TIGER/Line files from the TIGER data base which is continually
updated. During the update process for some 1998 TIGER/Line files errors caused anomalies to
be introduced into some chains represented in Record Types 1 and 2. For these cases road
features may appear in the 1998 TIGER/Line files unconnected to other road features (so-called
floating features) or severely skewed in relation to surrounding line features of any type.

Another road feature anomaly is the sporadic occurrence of road segments with a misclassified
Census Feature Class Code (CFCC).  The result is that complete chains for the affected road features
will have segments with different CFCC values assigned erroneously.  This problem could affect
applications that use the CFCC values for network analysis, routing, or for assigning symbology to
a feature when creating a map.  We believe that these errors were introduced inadvertently during
an updating operation to edit address range information on new as well as existing records.   These
errors will be corrected in the version of the 1999 TIGER/Line (also known as the VTDP
Verification TIGER/Line) scheduled to be released in late 1999.

INTERNAL POINT ANOMALIES 

For some polygon internal points (Record Type P) the latitude and longitude calculated for that
point lies on a vertex.  These occurances are limited to very small polygons.  For most uses this
will not be a problem, however, some GIS software applications use a higher precision in
calculating the locations of features which can cause the internal point to fall slightly outside of
the polygon.  This in turn can cause the software to malfunction.

QUESTIONS AND ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Questions regarding the Voting District Project should be directed to either John Byle or Janemary
Rosenson of the Geography Division at (301)457-1128.  Technical questions about the Census
TIGER/Line files and future plans for this and other TIGER-related products may be directed to the
Products and Services Staff of the Geography Division at (301) 457-1128 or to the e-mail
address tiger@census.gov.  In addition to this Cooperative Program version of TIGER/Line the
Census Bureau also produces a version of TIGER/Line for public sale and a variety of related
products based on TIGER data.  General information about these products is available from the
TIGER page on the Census Bureau's World Wide Web site
(http://www.census.gov/geo/www/tiger/).  This Web site also is a source of information that is
of specific interest to TIGER/Line users and of general interest regarding the geographic programs
at the Census Bureau.  As appropriate, additional information about this product will be posted,
such as ERRATA or USER NOTES.






