
   ARKANSAS BEST CORPORATION, PETITIONER V. COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL
REVENUE

   No. 86-751

   In the Supreme Court of the United States

   October Term, 1987

   On Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals for the
Eighth Circuit

   Brief for the Respondent

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Opinions below
   Jurisdiction
   Statute involved
   Question Presented
   Statement
   Introduction and summary of argument
   Argument:
      All of petitioner's shares of bank stock sold in 1975 were
      "capital assets" and the resulting loss was therefore a
      capital loss
      A. The express terms of Section 1221 unequivocally require
         that petitioner's loss be treated as a capital loss
      B. This Court's Corn Products decision did not create
         an extra-statutory exception to the specific terms of
         Section 1221
      C. The test petitioner seeks to apply for determining
         whether property is a "capital asset" is illogical
         and unworkable
   Conclusion

                            OPINIONS BELOW

   The opinion of the court of appeals (Pet. App. A1-A12) is reported
at 800 F.2d 215.  The opinion of the Tax Court (Pet. App. B1-B28) is
reported at 83 T.C. 640.

                             JURISDICTION

   The judgment of the court of appeals (J.A. 23) was entered on
September 9, 1986.  The petition for a writ of certiorari was filed on
November 7, 1986, and was granted on March 23, 1987 (J.A. 24).  The
jurisdiction of this Court rests on 28 U.S.C. 1254(1).

                           STATUTE INVOLVED

   Section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. provides)

                        Capital asset defined.

         For purposes of this subtitle, the term "capital asset" means
      property held by the taxpayer whether or not connected with his
      trade or business), but does not include --

         (1) stock in trade of the taxpayer or other property of a
      kind which would properly be included in the inventory of the
      taxpayer if on hand at the close of the taxable year, or
      property held by the taxpayer primarily for sale to customers in
      the ordinary course of his trade or business;

         (2) property, used in his trade or business, of a character
      which is subject to the allowance for depreciation provided in
      section 167, or real property used in his trade or business;

         (3) a copyright, a literary, musical, or artistic
      composition, a letter or memorandum, or similar property, held
      by --

         (A) a taxpayer whose personal efforts created such property,

         (B) in the case of a letter, memorandum, or similar property,
      a taxpayer for whom such property was prepared or produced, or

         (C) a taxpayer in whose hands the basis of such property is
      determined, for purposes of determining gain from a sale or
      exchange, in whole or in part by reference to the basis of such
      property in the hands of a taxpayer described in subparagraph
      (A) or (B);

         (4) accounts or notes receivable acquired in the ordinary
      course of trade or business for services rendered or from the
      sale of property described in paragraph (1);

         (5) a publication of the United States Government (including
      the Congressional Record) which is received from the United
      States Government or any agency thereof, other than by purchase
      at the price at which it is offered for sale to the public, and
      which is held by --

         (A) a taxpayer who so received such publication, or

         (B) a taxpayer in whose hands the basis of such publication
      is determined, for purposes of determining gain from a sale or
      exchange, in whole or in part by reference to the basis of such
      publication in the hands of a taxpayer described in subparagraph
      (A).

                          QUESTION PRESENTED

   Whether 661,000 shares of common stock of a bank that petitioner
sold in 1975 were "capital assets" as defined in Section 1221 of the
Internal Revenue Code, with the result that the loss realized by
petitioner on the sale of the stock was not an ordinary loss, but
rather was a capital loss subject to limited deductibility under
Section 165(f) of the Code.

                               STATEMENT

   Petitioner is a diversified holding company.  It was organized in
1966 to hold all of the stock of Arkansas Best Freight System, Inc., a
successful trucking line operating in the Midwest.  Petitioner
immediately embarked upon an expansion program with the plan of
becoming a conglomerate.  It acquired all of the stock of various
corporations engaged in furniture manufacturing, insurance, data
processing, used tire retreading, and new tire sales.  The tire
subsidiary also held the real estate occupied by petitioner and its
subsidiaries.  Petitioner provided financial planning and, in some
cases, accounting and personnel services to its subsidiaries, and they
in turn paid a management fee to it.  The subsidiaries often acted as
suppliers or customers for one another, and they generally interacted
in a synergistic fashion.  Pet. App. A2, B3-B4, B19;  J.A. 2-3.

   From 1966, the year of petitioner's organization, until 1973,
Robert A. Young, Jr. served as Chairman of petitioner's Board of
Directors.  Between March 1967 and April 1968, Young personally
acquired 209,000 shares of the common stock of the National Bank of
Commerce of Dallas, Texas (the Bank), as well as rights to buy
additional Bank shares.  These shares and rights were transferred to
petitioner in June 1968.  As a result of these transactions, and of
petitioner's purchase of additional bank shares later that year,
petitioner at the end of 1968 owned 266,614 shares of the Bank's
common stock, or 64.97% of the then-outstanding common shares.  Pet.
App. A2, B4-B5;  J.A. 4-8.

   At the time petitioner acquired the Bank shares, it was aware of
pending legislation concerning bank holding companies that, if
enacted, would substantially affect corporations that acquired, or had
acquired controlling interests in banks.  Petitioner had called a
special meeting of its shareholders to consider the proposed
acquisition of Bank stock.  Petitioner informed them in a proxy
statement that enactment of the pending legislation would cause it to
be classified as a "bank holding company" if it acquired the Bank
shares, and might require it, as such, to divest itself of voting
shares of companies that were not banks or bank holding companies.
Pet. App. B5-B6.

   On the other hand, petitioner also informed its shareholders that
there were good reasons for acquiring the Bank stock.  Petitioner had
obtained disinterested appraisals of the Bank stock and projections of
the Bank's expected growth and earnings, which suggested that the
acquisition would be a good investment.  Dallas at the time was
developing rapidly as a financial center, and banks were at the center
of the boom, so it seemed likely that the Bank shares would appreciate
in value.  Moreover, petitioner was planning a public offering of its
own shares and believed that its financial statements would be
rendered more attractive by virtue of ownership of the Bank stock.
The acquisition was also expected to yield favorable results in other
respects, including improved price/earnings ratios, enhanced prestige
and access to financing in the financial community, and some
protection from hostile takeover attempts.  Pet. App. B5-B6;  J.A.
8-9.

   After the acquisition, the Bank did not interact with petitioner
and its subsidiaries in the same synergistic fashion as did the other
subsidiaries.  The Bank offered no financing to the corporate group
and, as was typical of banks, it contributed little by way of earnings
distributions.  Petitioner supplied no management services to the
Bank, and the Bank did not pay it any management fees.  At no time did
petitioner have more than three representatives on the Bank's board of
directors, which averaged 20 members.  Pet. App. B7.

   In December 1970, Congress enacted the Bank Holding Company Act
Amendments of 1970, Pub. L. No. 91-607, 84 Stat. 1760.  Pursuant to
this new statute, petitioner was classified as a bank holding company
and was required either to cease making acquisitions of non-bank
businesses or to divest itself of control of the Bank.  See 12 U.S.C.
1841(a).  Petitioner chose the latter alternative.  On July 30, 1971,
petitioner filed with the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas an
irrevocable declaration that it would divest itself of control of the
Bank by January 1, 1981.  J.A. 10.  Petitioner was then free to make
further acquisitions of non-bank businesses, and it proceeded to do
so.  Pet. App. B7;  J.A. 10-11.

   Between 1969 and 1974, petitioner acquired 585,795 additional Bank
shares by means of various purchases, stock dividends, conversions,
and responses to capital calls.  These acquisitions served to increase
petitioner's holdings to 852,409 shares, or 65.77% of the common
shares then outstanding.  Thus, although petitioner more than tripled
the number of shares that it owned during this period, its percentage
interest in the Bank remained substantially the same, increasing by
only 0.8%.  Pet. App. B8-B9.  /1/

   The capital calls made by the Bank during 1969-1974 reflected the
concerns of federal regulators that the Bank was inadequately
capitalized.  From 1968 until 1972 the Bank appeared to be successful
and growing, and the capital calls during that time were designed to
accommodate its growth.  In 1972, however, after petitioner had
commenced negotiations with Texas Commerce Bancshares (TCB) to divest
itself of the Bank shares on favorable terms in a stock-for-stock
transaction, TCB's representatives examined the Bank's loan portfolio
and discovered serious problems.  TCB thereupon withdrew from the
negotiations.  Subsequently, federal examiners undertook their own
examination and classified the Bank as a problem bank, primarily
because it had a heavy concentration of loans in the Dallas real
estate business, which suffered a severe collapse at about that time.
Pet. App. A2-A3, B9-B10.

   The capital calls issued by the Bank after 1972 were in response to
these loan-portfolio problems.  Petitioner responded to the capital
calls for a number of reasons.  First, participation of the majority
shareholder was essential to save the Bank, and thus petitioner was
compelled to participate if it wished to preserve its equity stake.
Second, failure to participate, with the resultant demise of the Bank,
likely would have exposed petitioner to litigation by minority
shareholders.  Third, permitting the Bank to fail would reflect badly
on petitioner so that its sources of financing might be jeopardized
and its reputation for skilled management might be tarnished.  Pet.
App. B10-B11.  /2/

   Notwithstanding the Bank's problems, petitioner still hoped, at
least as late as July 1974, to dispose of its Bank stock at a profit,
and it apparently expected capital-gain treatment on such a profitable
sale.  At a meeting of petitioner's board of directors in that month,
its general counsel reviewed the possible tax treatment of a bank
stock divestiture.  He expressed the hope that, pursuant to pending
legislation, the anticipated capital gain could be spread over a
ten-year period, or, alternatively, that the proceeds of sale could be
invested in a new asset and that taxation of the capital gain could be
delayed until the disposition of the new asset.  Pet. App. B10.
Throughout the period in question, petitioner referred to the Bank
stock as an "investment" in its financial records and other corporate
documents (Pet. App. B7;  Exhs. Q1-Q8).  /3/

   On June 30, 1975, petitioner sold to a group of investors 661,000
shares of Bank stock, representing 51% of the outstanding common
stock, leaving petitioner with a 14.7% stake.  For the 661,000 shares
sold, petitioner received cash and a note, secured by the shares sold,
with an aggregate value in excess of $5.9 million (Pet. App. B11;
J.A. 13, Paragraph 30(b)).  Petitioner's cost or "basis" in the
661,000 shares was about $15 million (J.A. Paragraph 7).

   On a consolidated federal income tax return filed on behalf of
itself and its subsidiaries for 1975, petitioner claimed a deduction
for an ordinary loss in the amount of $9,995,688 from the sale of the
661,000 shares of Bank stock.  In his notice of deficiencies, the
Commissioner disallowed the claimed ordinary-loss deduction, finding
that the loss resulting from the sale was a capital loss, subject to
the limitations of Sections 165(f) and 1211(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code.  /4/ Those Sections generally provide that a corporate taxpayer
may deduct capital losses only to the extent of its capital gains,
while permitting excess capital losses to be carried over to other
years.

   2. Petitioner sought redetermination of the asserted deficiencies
in the Tax Court.  The Tax Court agreed with the Commissioner that the
Bank shares acquired by petitioner before the end of 1972 were capital
assets whose disposition gave rise to a capital loss.  But the court
held that the Bank shares acquired by petitioner after 1972, with the
exception of one minor acquisition, /5/ were non-capital assets whose
disposition gave rise to an ordinary loss.  In so holding, the Tax
Court took as its points of departure its own previous opinion in W.W.
Windle Co. v. Commissioner, 65 T.C. 694, 712 (1976), appeal dismissed,
550 F.2d 43 (1st Cir.), cert. denied, 431 U.S. 966 (1977), and the
Court of Claims' opinion in Booth Newspapers, Inc. v. United States,
303 F.2d 916 (1962).  Those two decisions had interpreted this Court's
opinion in Corn Products Refining Co. v. Commissioner, 350 U.S. 46
(1955), to support the conclusion that securities disposed of by a
taxpayer should be treated as a non-capital asset if the securities
transaction is sufficiently related to the taxpayer's trade or
business.  The Tax Court framed the issue based on Booth Newspapers as
whether "petitioner purchased and held the stock of (the Bank) as an
integral and necessary act in the conduct of (petitioner's) business
or whether the stock was purchased and held with an investment
purpose" (Pet. App. B16).  The court further noted that, under its
decision in W.W. Windle, "'stock purchased with a substantial
investment purpose is a capital asset even if there is a more
substantial business motive for the purchase'" (id. at B17 (quoting 65
T.C. at 712)).

   The Tax Court did not find that the purchase and holding of Bank
stock was "an integral and necessary act" in the conduct of
petitioner's business or that of its subsidiaries;  instead, the court
extended the Booth Newspapers rationale to the facts of this case.
The Tax Court asserted, in apparent conflict with its findings of fact
(see Pet. App. B5-B6), that most of petitioner's acquisitions of Bank
shares after 1972 "were made exclusively for business purposes and
subsequently held for the same reasons" (Pet. App. B20).  The court
noted in this connection that the purchases were designed "to preserve
(petitioner's) business reputation" and that expenditures for such a
purpose are typically deductible as business expenses (id. at
B20-B21).  The court on that basis concluded that these shares were
non-capital assets, the sale of which gave rise to an ordinary loss
(ibid.).  With respect to petitioner's acquisitions of Bank stock
during 1968-1972, by contrast, the Tax Court concluded that the
acquisitions "were motivated primarily by investment purpose" and
therefore constituted capital assets giving rise to a capital loss
when sold in 1975 (id. at B18, B19).

   3. The Commissioner appealed with respect to the Tax Court's
holding that most of the Bank shares acquired after 1972 were ordinary
assets.  Petitioner cross-appealed with respect to the Tax Court's
holding that the shares acquired between July 30, 1971, and December
31, 1972, were capital assets.  /6/ The court of appeals, by a 2-1
vote, held in favor of the Commissioner, reversing "insofar as the Tax
Court allowed ordinary loss treatment for any of the capital stock
transactions" (Pet. App. A2), but affirming the Tax Court's decision
in all other respects (id. at A1-A11).

   The court of appeals concluded that all of petitioner's shares of
Bank stock fell within the definition of "capital asset" set forth in
Section 1221 of the Code.  That Section defines a "capital asset" as
"property held by the taxpayer (whether or not connected with his
trade or business)," with five specific exceptions.  The court
concluded that the Bank shares satisfied the general definition in
Section 1221 and, as petitioner conceded, did not fall within any of
the five exceptions.  Pet. App. A4-A8.  The court of appeals
acknowledged that some courts, including the Court of Claims in Booth
Newspapers, had "taken the position that capital stock is not a
capital asset when acquired to assure a supply of raw materials vital
to the taxpayer's business, to preserve an existing business, or even
to pursue new business" (id. at A8;  see id. at A8-A10 (citing
cases)).  But the court expressly rejected these decisions,
characterizing them as "misbegotten" (id. at A10) and noting that they
"lack a basis in the statutory language" (id. at A9).  Dismissing
petitioner's contention that these decisions simply applied a judicial
exception supposedly created by this Court's Corn Products opinion,
the court below emphasized that it "d(id) not read Corn Products as
either requiring or permitting the courts to decide that capital stock
can be anything other than a capital asset under section 1221" (id. at
A10).  /7/

                 INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

   Petitioner candidly acknowledges that the 661,000 shares of Bank
stock it sold in 1975 fall within the statutory definition of "capital
asset" contained in Section 1221 of the Code.  Petitioner thus
concedes that the loss it realized on the sale of those shares would
give rise to a capital loss "based on the statutory language alone"
(Br. 12).  Petitioner nevertheless contends that a substantial portion
of these shares -- those acquired after July 30, 1971 -- should be
treated as non-capital assets whose sale gave rise to an ordinary
loss.

   In making this contention, petitioner relies on a supposed extra
statutory exception to Section 1221's definition of "capital asset."
Petitioner characterizes this supposed exception, which would be an
addition to the five exceptions listed in the statute, as an
"improvement( )" (Br. 35) worked by "judicial craftsmen" (Br. 34) upon
the statutory definition -- a definition that petitioner describes as
a "statutory strait jacket" and "a rough Congressional tool whose
imperfections were obvious" (Br. 21, 34).  Petitioner asserts that
this judge-made improvement was necessary to "effectuate the intent of
Congress" (Br. 20) by "distinguish(ing) between assets acquired and
held in connection with the taxpayer's usual trade or business and
those acquired principally for investment" (Br. 11).  Based on this
theory, petitioner asserts that any asset acquired for "a dominant
business motive" (Br. 43) is not a capital asset.  And petitioner
maintains that this amendment to the statutory definition was
accomplished by this Court's opinion in Corn Products Refining Co. v.
Commissioner, 350 U.S. 46 (1955), which on petitioner's view "cannot
be reconciled" (Br. 11) with the decision below treating the Bank
shares as capital assets.  Each step of petitioner's argument is
wrong.

   First, as petitioner admits, the rule that it seeks to apply here
cannot be squared with the language of the statute.  That fact alone
is dispositive of petitioner's contention.  An inquiry into
legislative intent is an aid to interpreting a statute, but it cannot
provide a basis for ignoring the statute's language.

   Second, petitioner's description of Congress's intent is mistaken
in any event.  Petitioner adduces no evidence to support its view that
Congress intended in enacting Section 1221 to exclude all
business-related assets from the definition of "capital asset." The
language of the statute is surely hostile to that view:  in defining
"capital asset" as property held by the taxpayer "whether or not
connected with his trade or business," the statute obviously
contemplates the existence of "capital assets" that are
business-connected.  The legislative history, furthermore, shows that
Congress meant what it said in defining "capital asset" to include all
property other than property specifically excepted in the statute.

   Third, this Court's decision in Corn Products does not support
petitioner's contention.  The Court there construed the provisions of
the predecessor of Section 1221 and found that the property in
question fell within one of the enumerated exceptions.  The Court did
not purport to create a new judicial exception to the words of the
statute.

   Finally, as the existing confusion in the lower courts suggests,
the rule advanced by petitioner would produce an amorphous,
ill-defined category of non-capital assedts that is not amenable to
consistent judicial application.  By making the definition of "capital
asset" depend on the "subjective motivations of taxpayers" (Pet. Br.
12), which are quite difficult for a court to ascertain, petitioner's
rule in practical effect would allow taxpayers to wait and see what
tax treatment will be most favorable, and then decide for themselves,
depending on whether they have a gain or loss, whether they prefer the
asset to be treated as capital or ordinary.  In short, petitioner's
contention is untenable;  the court of appeals correctly held that the
definition of "capital asset" is that expressly formulated by Congress
in Section 1221 of the Code.

                               ARGUMENT

 ALL OF PETITIONER'S SHARES OF BANK STOCK SOLD IN 1975 WERE "CAPITAL
ASSETS," AND THE RESULTING LOSS WAS THEREFORE A CAPITAL LOSS

 A. The Express Terms Of Section 1221 Unequivocally Require That
Petitioner's Loss Be Treated As A Capital Loss

   1. The statutory framework that governs this case is not
complicated.  Section 165(a) of the Code allows as a deduction from
gross income "any loss sustained during the taxable year and not
compensated for by insurance or otherwise." This provision is
qualified by Section 165(f), which provides that "(l)osses from sales
or exchanges of capital assets shall be allowed only to the extent
allowed in sections 1211 and 1212." Section 1211(a) provides:  "In the
case of a corporation, losses from sales or exchanges of capital
assets shall be allowed only to the extent of gains from such sales or
exchanges." Section 1212(a) establishes rules governing carryback and
carryforward of capital losses, permitting them to be offset against
capital gains in certain earlier or later years.

   It is apparent from this statutory framework that the question
whether the loss suffered by petitioner on the sale of the Bank stock
was a "capital" loss, subject to the limitations of Sections 1211 and
1212, turns entirely on whether those shares were "capital assets"
within the meaning of Section 165(f).  That term is explicitly defined
in Section 1221.  It sets forth the general rule that, "(f)or purposes
of this subtitle, the term 'capital asset' means property held by the
taxpayer (whether or not connected with his trade or business)."
Section 1221 then goes on to state that "the term 'capital asset' * *
* does not include" property that falls within five specific
exceptions.  These exceptions cover, among other things, "property of
a kind which would properly be included in the inventory of the
taxpayer" (Section 1221(1));  real property or other depreciable
property used in the taxpayer's trade or business (Section 1221(2));
and "accounts or notes receivable acquired in the ordinary course of
trade or business for services rendered or from the sale of property
described in paragraph (1)" (Section 1221(4)).  /8/

   Petitioner does not dispute that its Bank stock falls within the
body of the Section 1221 definition, i.e., that the Bank stock was
"property held by the taxpayer (whether or not connected with his
trade or business)." By the same token, petitioner has never claimed,
and could not plausibly claim, that the Bank stock is covered by any
of the enumerated statutory exceptions.  The plain language of the
statute thus makes it clear that all of petitioner's Bank stock was a
"capital asset," and hence that the entire loss suffered by petitioner
upon the sale of the shares in 1975 was a "capital loss." Absent some
compelling reason for reaching a contrary conclusion, such unambiguous
statutory language should be dispositive.  See, e.g., Randall v.
Loftsgaarden, No. 85-519 (July 2, 1986), slip op. 8;  United States v.
Turkette, 452 U.S. 576, 580 (1981).  /9/

   2. Although petitioner does not try to anchor its argument in the
text of Section 1221, it contends that one must look beyond the
statutory language to effectuate the intent of Congress.  Petitioner
asserts that Congress's intent in enacting Section 1221 was "to
distinguish between assets acaquired and held in connection with the
taxpayer's usual trade or business and those acquired principally for
investment" (Br. 11), or, alternatively, "to distinguish between
transactions related to everyday business operations and transactions
which are 'not the normal source of business income'" (Br. 20
(citation omitted)).  The language of the statute, however,
unmistakably defeats this contention.  The words that Congress chose
make it clear that Congress did not intend the definition of "capital
asset" to turn on the distinction between "business" assets or
transactions and "investment" assets or transactions.

   Putting aside for the moment the five specific exceptions, the
basic definition of "capital asset" contained in Section 1221 is
"property held by the taxpayer (whether or not connected with his
trade or business)" (emphasis added).  The parenthetical clause serves
no purpose other than to dispel the very contention that petitioner is
making.  That clause expressly makes the business purpose underlying
the acquisition or use of an asset irrelevant in determining whether
it is covered by the general definition.  The existence of a business
nexus, of course, will often be relevant in determining whether a
particular asset is covered by one of the five listed exceptions,
since those exceptions speak of "stock in trade," depreciable property
and real property "used in  the taxpayer's  grade or business" and of
accounts or notes receivable "acquired in the ordinary course of  his
trade or business" (I.R.C. Section 1221(1), (2), and (4)).  But
petitioner does not contend that any of the listed exceptions covers
its Bank shares, and the existence vel non of a business connection is
thus irrelevant in this case.

   As this Court has noted, "(t)he 'plain purpose' of legislation * *
* is determined in the first instance with reference to the plain
language of the statute itself." Board of Governors of the Fed.
Reserve System v. Dimension Financial Corp;., No. 84-1274 (Jan. 22,
1986), slip op. 12.  Under this principle, the parenthetical clause in
Section 1221 completely refutes petitioner's contention about the
supposed intent of Congress.  We can accept arguendo the truth of
petitioner's assertion (see Br. 34) that the process of drafting
legislation is sufficiently imperfect that statutes will often need
judicial refinement to mirror congressional intent accurately.  But
petitioner is not seeking refinement here, it is seeking a complete
redrafting of the statute.  If Congress truly intended the definition
of "capital asset" to exclude all property acquired or used for a
business purpose, it is inconceivable that Congress would have defined
"capital asset" to mean all property "whether or not connected with
(a) trade or business." That clause, obviously, contemplates that some
property connected with a trade or business can be a capital asset,
and it thus negates in the clearest language imaginable the
congressional intent hypothesized by petitioner.

   3. The legislative history of Section 1221, to which petitioner
makes no reference, confirms that Congress did not intend the
definition of "capital asset" to turn on the existence vel non of a
dominant business motive for an asset's acquisition or use.  The body
of the statutory definition, including the parenthetical clause, has
remained unchanged in any fashion relevant here since its enactment in
1924.  See Revenue Act of 1924, ch. 234, Section 208(a)(8), 43 Stat.
263.  /10/ At that time, the only exception to the definition of
"capital asset" was the exception for inventory and stock-in-trade,
which closely resembled that now set forth in Section 1221(1).  /11/
Congress subsequently added other exceptions, some of which, like the
inventory exception, were designed to cover business-related assets.
In 1938, for example, Congress added an exception for depreciable
property used in a trade or business, an exception corresponding to
that now contained in Section 1221(2).  See Revenue Act of 1938, ch.
289, Section 117(a)(1), 52 Stat. 500.  In 1942, Congress amended that
exception to include real property used in a trade or business.
Revenue Act of 1942, ch. 619, Section 151(a), 56 Stat. 846.  The
exception for certain accounts or notes receivable "acquired in the
ordinary course of trade or business," now set forth in Section
1221(4), was added by the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 68A Stat.
322.  /12/

   The manner in which Section 1221 has evolved clearly shows that it
cannot be read to embody a universal exception for all
business-related assets.  Rather, Congress has amended the statute on
several occasions to remove specified categories of business-related
assets from the general definition.  These specific amendments, of
course, would have been entirely unnecessary if the statute had always
incorporated the universal exception that petitioner posits.  Each
time Congress has amended the statute, moreover, it has restricted its
action to enacting the enumerated exception, leaving intact the
parenthetical clause stating that property, unless specifically
excepted, is a capital asset "whether or not connected with (the
taxpayer's) trade or business." Thus, although the statute in its
present form contains specific exceptions that remove many, and
perhaps most, business-related assets other than stock and securities
from the body of the definition, the parenthetical clause obviously
retains its vitality for property not covered by those exceptions.
There is absolutely no reason to believe that Congress intended stock
like that sold by petitioner in 1975 to be treated as other than a
"capital asset," whether or not its acquisition was motivated by a
business purpose.

   The indicia of congressional intent outside the statute's text also
demonstrate the unsoundness of petitioner's contention.  When Congress
was considering the first definition of "capital assets" in 1921, a
question arose on the Senate floor whether there would be a
distinction between a capital transaction that takes place "as a part
of the (taxpayer's) business" and one that does not.  61 Cong. Rec.
5836 (1921) (Sen. King).  The reply given by Senator McCumber, a
member of the Senate Finance Committee, was that the only distinctions
were those made in the statute's text, which provided an exception for
business property of the type that would be included in inventory, as
well as an exception (repealed in 1924) covering property held for the
taxpayer's personal use.  See Revenue Act of 1921, ch. 136, Section
206(a)(6), 42 Stat. 233.  "Nothing further than what is contained" in
the statute was intended to be a ground for exclusion from the
statutory definition.  61 Cong. Rec. 5836-5837 (1921) (Sen. McCumber).

   The congressional reports accompanying the Revenue Act of 1934
reiterated that the exceptions to the general definition of "capital
asset" were limited to those specified in the statute.  That Act
amended the definition of "capital asset" to remove a holding-period
limitation contained in previous laws, and instead made the taxpayer's
holding period relevant only in determining whether his capital loss
on the asset's sale would be short-term or long-term.  /13/ The
discussion of that amendment in the House report stated (H.R. Rep.
704, 73d Cong., 2d Sess. 31 (1934) (emphasis added)):

         The following propositions are essential to the consideration
      of the new treatment:

                      *  *  *  *  *

         (4) Subsection (b) defines capital assets.  It will be noted
      that the definition includes all property, except as
      specifically excluded.

   The Senate report stated that it "concur(red) in the general
features of the plan proposed by the House bill, but believe(d) a few
modifications should be made therein." S. Rep. 558, 73d Cong., 2d
Sess. 12 (1934).  /14/ The congressional reports accompanying the
enactment of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 similarly stated that
Section 1221 was derived from Section 117(a)(1) of the 1939 Code,
which provided that "a capital asset is property held by the taxpayer
with certain exceptions." H.R. Rep. 1337, 83d Cong., 2d Sess. A273
(1954);  S. Rep. 1622, 83d Cong., 2d Sess. 431 (1954).  /15/

   Congress's repeated admonitions that exceptions to the definition
of "capital asset" are limited to those statutorily specified were
embodied in Treasury Regulations issued under the 1934 Act.  Article
117-1 of Regulations 86 provided that "(t)he term 'capital assets'
includes all classes of property not specifically excluded by section
117(b)." That statement in the Regulations has remained substantially
unchanged for more than 50 years, and it appears today at Treas. Reg.
Section 1.1221-1(a).  In sum, there is simply no basis for divining a
congressional intent that a general business-connection exception
should be engrafted into the definition of "capital asset" set forth
in Section 1221.  /16/

 B. This Court's Corn Products Decision Did Not Create An
Extra-Statutory Exception To The Specific Terms Of Section 1221

   Eschewing any reliance on the language of Section 1221 or its
legislative history, petitioner rests its entire argument on what it
calls "the Corn Products doctrine." Petitioner refers to a series of
lower-court decisions, beginning with Booth Newspapers, Inc. v. United
States, 303 F.2d 916 (Ct. Cl. 1962), that have purported to apply this
Court's opinion in Corn Products Refining Co. v. Commissioner, 350
U.S. 46 (1955).  The lower courts, apart from the court of appeals
below, have read that opinion to suggest that the terms of Section
1221 do not exclusivelhy control whether an asset is a "capital
asset," and that there exists a broad exception to the statutory
definition in addition to the exceptions statutorily specified.  Under
this so-called "Corn Products doctrine," the characterization as a
capital asset of property, including capital stock, is said to turn on
the extent to which the taxpayer's acquisition of the property had a
"business" rather than an "investment" purpose.

   We agree with the court of appeals that this line of lower-court
decisions is "misbegotten" (Pet. App. A10).  This Court in Corn
Products did not authorize an open-ended juudicial inquiry, divorced
from the text of Section 1221, into whether property is a "capital
asset." Rather, it simply construed the statute, giving a broad
reading to one of the explicit statutory exceptions.  A careful
examination of the Corn Products case shows that this Court's opinion
cannot be read "as either requiring or permitting the courts to decide
that capital stock (not held by a dealer) can be anything other than a
capital asset under section 1221." Pet. App. A10.

   Corn Products Refining Co. (the taxpayer) was a nationally known
manufacturer of starch, sugar and other products derived from grain
corn.  Most of its products were sold under contracts specifying a
fixed price, or the market price on the date of delivery, whichever
was lower (350 U.S. at 48).  It had a storage capacity of barely three
weeks' supply of raw corn.  In 1934 and 1936, when droughts had caused
sharp increases in the price of spot corn, the taxpayer had suffered
from unanticipated increases in the cost of raw materials.  To avoid a
recurrence of this problem, the taxpayer "began to establish a long
position in corn futures 'as a part of its corn buying program' and
'as the most economical method of obtaining an adequate supply of raw
corn' without entailing the expenditure of large sums for additional
storage facilities" (ibid.).

   When prices appeared favorable at harvest time, the taxpayer would
establish a long position in corn futures so as to assure an adequate
supply of corn at a stable price.  The taxpayer would take delivery on
such futures contracts as it found necessary for its manufacturing
operations, and it would sell off the rest of the futures contracts in
early summer if no shortage appeared imminent.  If shortages appeared,
however, it sold off the futures contracts only as it bought spot corn
for grinding.  350 U.S. at 48-49.  In 1940, the taxpayer netted a
profit of approximately $681,000 from futures transactions, which it
treated as a reduction in the cost of raw materials (see 16 T.C. 395,
398 (1951)).  In 11942, the taxpayer had a loss of approximately
$110,000 from futures transactions, which it treated as an addition to
cost of goods sold (see 11 T.C.M. (CCH) 721, 723-724 (1952)).  "In
computing its tax liability, Corn Products reported these figures as
ordinary profit and loss from the manufacturing operations for the
respective years" (350 U.S. at 49).

   After the Commissioner had asserted tax deficiencies for 1940 and
1942 on unrelated grounds, the taxpayer filed petitions in the Tax
Court, where it argued for the first time that its futures contracts
were "capital assets" whose sale gave rise to capital gains and
losses.  The Tax Court decided the 1940 case against the taxpayer on
other grounds (16 T.C. 395 (1951)).  In the 1942 case, the Tax Court
held that the taxpayer on its tax return had correctly treated the
futures transactions as "hedges" giving rise to an ordinary loss,
rather than "speculative transactions of a capital nature" (11 T.C.M.
at 726).

   On consolidated appeals, the Second Circuit affirmed (215 F.2d 513
(1954)).  It held that the taxpayer's futures transactions were
"hedging" transactions that fell within a specified exception to the
definition of "capital asset" contained in Section 117(a)(1) of the
1939 Code.  That definition read in pertinent part as follows:  "The
term 'capital assets' means property held by the taxpayer (whether or
not connected with his trade or business), but does not include stock
in trade of the taxpayer or other property of a kind which would
properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at
the close of the taxable year * * * ." Internal Revenue Code of 1939,
ch. 1, Section 117(a)(1), 53 Stat. 50.

   The Second Circuit began by explaining why hedging transactions in
futures contracts, as opposed to "legitimate capital transactions,"
came within the inventory exception set forth in Section 117(a).  The
court stated that a "hedge" is "part of the inventory purchase system
which is utilized solely for the purpose of stabilizing inventory
cost.  It is an integral part of the productive process * * * (that)
cannot reasonably be separated from the inventory items." The court
concluded:  "The tax treatment of hedges, then, is not a 'judge-made
exception' to Section 117(a);  it is simply a recognition by the
courts that property used in hedging transactions properly comes
within the exclusions of the section." 215 F.2d at 516.

   With this principle in mind, the court went on to address the
particular facts of the Corn Products case.  The court acknowledged
that, because the taxpayer in its futures transactions sought to
protect itself only from inventory price increases and not from price
declines, those transactions "did not constitute what is known as
'true' hedging" (215 F.2d at 516).  /17/ The court concluded, however,
that the distinction between a "true hedge" and the type of hedge used
by the taxpayer in Corn Products was not significant in determining
whether the futures contracts represented capital assets.  The court
explained (ibid.):

         The property here was used for essentially the same purpose
      and in the same manner as in true hedging.  Futures contracts
      were entered into to stabilize inventory costs and thus protect
      profit, and whether complete or only partial insurance was
      thereby obtained is simply a difference in degree, not in kind.
      Therefore, for the same reasons that the true hedge is not
      accorded capital treatment under Section 117(a), the kind of
      transactions with which we are now concerned are not to be
      regarded as capital ones either.

   Thus, the court concluded that the taxpayer's transactions in corn
futures fell within the inventory exception to the statutory
definition of "capital assets."

   This Court granted the taxpayer's petition for certiorari and
affirmed.  /18/ In so doing, the Court resolved the following question
presented in the petition (see 350 U.S. at 47 n.2):

         Are transactions in commodity futures which are not "true
      hedges" capital asset transactions and thus subject to the
      limitations of Section 117 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1939,
      or do the resulting gains and losses from such transactions give
      rise to ordinary income and ordinary deductions?

   There is language in the Court's opinion stating that profits and
losses from everyday business operations generally will not be
"capital" in nature, and it is this language that the lower courts
have invoked to justify the so-called "Corn Products doctrine." But a
careful examination of the opinion as a whole shows that the Court
simply gave a broad reading to the exceptions set forth in the statute
itself, and that it adopted the court of appeals' rationale that the
taxpayer's futures transactions were "hedges" that fell within the
inventory exception to the statutory definition of "capital asset."
/19/

   The Court first discussed the purpose of the taxpayer's futures
transctions.  It recited the lower courts' findings that those
transactions were "designed to protect  the taxpayer's  manufacturing
operations against a price increase in its principal raw material and
to assure a ready supply for future manufacturing requirements" (350
U.S. at 50).  The Court further observed that "it appears that the
transactions were vitally important to the company's business as a
form of insurance against increases in the price of raw corn" and that
"the purchase of corn futures assured the company a source of supply
which was admittedly cheaper than constructing additional storage
facilities for raw corn" (ibid.).  "(I)t is difficult to imagine," the
Court said, "a program more closely geared to a company's
manufacturing enterprise or more important to its successful
operation" (ibid.).

   In response to the taxpayer's "labeling its activity as that of a
'legitimate capitalist' exercising 'good judgment' in the futures
market," the Court stated that this characterization "ignore(d) the
testimony of its own officers (350 U.S. at 51).  Those individuals had
testified that "in entering (the futures) market the company was
'trying to protect a part of (its) manufacturing costs'" and "to fill
an actual 'need for the quantity of corn (bought)'" in order to cover
the products it expected to market (ibid.).  The Court likewise
dismissed as irrelevant the taxpayer's assertion "that its
transactions did not constitute 'true hedging.'" "It is true," the
Court explained, "that Corn Products did not secure complete
protection from its market operations.  * * * It is clear, however,
that  it  feared the possibility of a price rise more than that of a
price decline.  It therefore purchased partial insurance against its
principal risk, and hoped to retain sufficient flexibility to avoid
serious losses on a declining market" (ibid.).

   Having thus examined the function and significance of the
taxpayer's market operations, the Court turned to the ultimate
question in the case -- whether the hedging contracts were "capital
assets" under the statutory definition of that term.  The Court
introduced the central paragraph of its opinion as follows (350 U.S.
at 51):  "Nor can we find support for petitioner's contention that
hedging is not within the exclusions of Section 117(a)." The Court
admitted that the futures did not "come within the literal language of
the exclusions set out in that section" because they "were not stock
in trade, actual inventory, property held for sale to customers or
depreciable property used in a trade or business" (id. at 51-52).  The
Court noted some of the purposes underlying the capital-asset
provisions, including the grant of preferential treatment to
transactions that "are not the normal source of business income";  it
also noted that "Congress intended that profits and losses arising
from the everyday operation of a business be considered as ordinary
income or loss rather than capital gain or loss" (ibid.).  The court
concluded (id. at 52):  "Since this section is an exception from the
normal tax requirements of the Internal Revenue Code, the definition
of a capital asset must be narrowly applied and its exclusions
interpreted broadly." /20/

   The Court first pointed out that the body of the definition of
capital asset -- "property held by the taxpayer (whether or not
connected with his trade or business)" -- had been given a narrow
reading in cases involving contract claims or rights to what would be
ordinary income, thereby preventing taxpayers from converting ordinary
income into preferentially taxed capital gains.  See 350 U.S. at 52
(citing Kieselbach v. Commissioner, 317 U.S. 399, 403 (1943))
(interest portion of lump-sum condemnation award);  Hort v.
Commissioner, 313 U.S. 28, 31 (1941) (unexpired lease).  See also
Commissioner v. Gilette Motor Transport, Inc., 364 U.S. 130, 134-136
(1960) (claim for the fair rental value of property is not itself
"property" within the meaning of former Section 117(a)).  The Court
therefore concluded that, while "property" should be construed
narrowly, the statutory exclusions from the definition of "capital
asset" had to be interpreted broadly in order "to effectuate the basic
congressional purpose" (350 U.S. at 52).

   The Court then explained that the established treatment of
"hedging" transactions required that the statutory exclusions be
interpreted broadly enough to embrace commodity futures employed for
that purpose.  The Court noted that the Treasury Department, in G.C.M.
17322, XV-2 C.B. 151 (1936), had concluded that "hedging transactions
were essentially to be regarded as insurance rather than a dealing in
capital assets," and hence that "gains and losses therefrom were
ordinary business gains and losses" (350 U.S. at 52);  in that same
ruling, the Treasury had concluded that a manufacturer's raw material
inventory should be adjusted to reflect futures contracts employed for
hedging (XV-2 C.B. at 153, 154-155).  The Court noted that the
Treasury ruling "had been consistently followed by the courts as well
as by the Commissioner" for almost 20 years and was solidly entrenched
(350 U.S. at 53).  And the Court pointed out that, in Section 1233(a)
of the 1954 Code, which had just recently been enacted, Congress had
explicitly recognized that bona fide hedging transactions in commodity
futures "do not result in capital gains or losses" (350 U.S. at 53 &
n.9).

   The Court's ultimate conclusion in Corn Products left little doubt
as to the scope of its holding.  It ruled "that the statute clearly
refutes the (taxpayer's) contention" (350 U.S. at 53 (emphasis
added)).  /21/ In affirming the Second Circuit, this Court's opinion
in Corn Products is thus fully consistent with the lower court's
statement that the tax treatment of hedges is not "a judge-made
exception" to the predecessor of Section 1221, but a recognition "that
property used in hedging transactions properly comes within the
exclusions of the section" (215 F.2d at 516).  Indeed, this Court
explicitly rejected the idea that Section 1221's text is inadequate to
its task in Malat v. Riddell, 383 U.S. 5469, 572 (1966), where, after
referring to the Corn Products opinion, it stated that "(a) literal
reading of (Section 1221) is consistent with (its) legislative
purpose." Nothing in Corn Products casts any doubt on the Eighth
Circuit's conclusion in this case that, in light of Congress's failure
"to incorporate some sort of exception regarding capital stock" in
Section 1221, "the judiciary lacks authority to create exceptions to
section 1221 that Congress did not choose to make" (Pet. App. A10).
/22/

 C. The Test Petitioner Seeks To Apply For Determining Whether
Property Is A "Capital Asset" Is Illogical And Unworkable

   Petitioner contends that the status of an asset as a "capital
asset" should not be governed by Section 1221, but rather should be
governed by the "Corn Products doctrine" that has been developed by
the lower courts.  One of the many problems with this contention is
that there is no single identifiable "Corn Products doctrine." Rather,
the lower courts are in considerable disarray on this issue, and the
"doctrine" is little more than an amorphous collection of decisions
that have repeatedly changed the applicable test, usually with a view
to expanding the circumstances under which capital stock can be
excluded from the definition of a "capital asset." See generally 2 B.
Bittker, supra, Section 51.10.3, at 51-61;  Note, The Corn Products
Doctrine and Its Application To Partnership Interests, 79 Colum. L.
Rev. 341 (1979);  Troxell & Noall, Judicial Erosion of the Concept of
Securities as Capital Assets, 19 Tax L. Rev. 185 (1964).  This frolic
by the lower courts has led to many decisions that "possibly might
surprise the Corn Products (C)ourt." Agway, Inc. v. United States, 524
F.2d 1194, 1200 (Ct. Cl. 1975).  In our view, none of the various
formulations of the "Corn Products doctrine" should supplant the
statutory definition that Congress adopted.

   1. The line of lower-court cases upon which petitioner relies
begins with Booth Newspapers, Inc. v. United States, 303 F.2d 916 (Ct.
Cl. 1962).  In that case, two newspapers bought all of the stock of a
paper company in order to assure an adequate supply of newsprint in a
time of shortage, and they sold the stock at a loss several years
later when the shortage had eased.  The Court of Claims brushed aside
Section 1221's definition of capital asset as "an elastic concept"
(303 F.2d at 920) and permitted an ordinary-loss deduction on the sale
of the stock.  The test formulated by the Court of Claims allowed
ordinary-loss treatment in the case of any securities "purchased by a
taxpayer as an integral and necessary act in the conduct of his
business," as opposed to securities whose purchase was motivated by
"an investment purpose" (id. at 921).

   As might be expected from a doctrine so divorced from any statutory
foundation, the rule announced in Booth Newspapers has continued to
expand and change shape as different courts have tinkered with it.
The possibility that the departure from Section 1221 might be confined
to cases where the stock in question was acquired to help guarantee a
source of supply soon evaporated, and "the Corn Products doctrine" at
that point ceased to bear any sensible relationship to the Corn
Products case.  /23/ The new doctrine was applied to afford
ordinary-loss treatment on the sale of stock acquired by an individual
to assure employment (Steadman v. Commissioner, 424 F.2d 1 (6th Cir.),
cert. denied, 400 U.S. 869 (1970)), and on the sale of stock acquired
by a corporate commission agency to assure an important accousnt
(Waterman, Largen & Co. v. United States, 419 F.2d 845 (Ct. Cl. 1969),
cert. denied, 400 U.S. 869 (1970)).  And the requirement enunciated in
Booth Newspapers -- that the stock acquisition be integral to an
existing business -- was substantially eroded when the "Corn Products
doctrine" was invoked to allow an ordinary loss on the sale of stock
acquired with the objective of expanding the taxpayer's existing
business into a new area (Schlumberger Technology Corp. v. United
States, 443 F.2d 1115 (5th Cir. 1971)).

   The courts are also in disarray with respect to the motive that
must underlie an acquisition of stock in order for the sale of that
stock to generate an ordinary loss.  Some courts have been satisfied
as long as there is a dominant business purpose for the acquisition;
such a motive has been found to exist, and has been held sufficient to
make stock a non-capital asset, where the shares had been held for 44
years.  See Union Pacific R.R. v. United States, 524 F.2d 1343 (Ct.
Cl. 1975), cert. denied, 429 U.S. 827 (1976).  But the existence of a
business motivation -- usually, but not invariably, determined on a
subjective basis /24/ -- has not always been thought to be enough.
The Tax Court, seeking to avoid the need to measure and compare
different motives, has held in a reviewed decision that any
substantial investment motive for acquiring an asset would cause it to
be treated as a "capital asset," even if the taxpayer could show a
dominant business motive.  W.W. Windle Co. v. Commissioner, 65 T.C.
694 (1976), appeal dismissed, 550 F.2d 43 (1st Cir.), cert. denied,
431 U.S. 966 (1977).  The Fourth Circuit has taken the same approach.
Wright v. Commissioner, 756 F.2d 1039 (1985).  Most recently, some
courts, including the Tax Court in this case (Pet. App. B20-B21), have
stated that any stock acquisition motivated by the purpose of
protecting one's business reputation falls within the "Corn Products
doctrine." Thus, where a taxpayer initially agreed to purchase stock
in a foreign company as an investment, and later went ahead with the
purchase even though it had since learned that the acquired company
had severe financial difficulties, the stock was held to be a
non-capital asset on the theory that failing to go through with the
deal would have harmed the purchaser's business reputation as a
supposedly astute investor.  Campbell Taggart, Inc. v. United States,
744 F.2d 442, 451 (5th Cir. 1984).  /25/

   Regardless of its particular formulation, the "Corn Products
doctrine" developed by the lower courts presents numerous
difficulties.  First and foremost, as discussed earlier, it requires
that the statutory definition of "capital asset" be completely
ignored.  Instead, it establishes an array of tests for determining
whether property is a "capital asset" -- tests that are fundamentally
at odds with the import of the parenthetical clause in Section 1221,
which has remained in the statute undisturbed for 60 years.  However,
the doctrine is articulated in a particular case, it is likely to
produce non-capital-asset treatment in a variety of situations that
bear no resemblance at all to Corn Products itself.

   Second, "the Corn Products doctrine" illegally makes the
capital-asset determination turn upon a false dichotomy.  A "business
purpose" and an "investment purpose" are ill-defined categories that
are not true alternatives.  Clearly, both purposes may co-exist in a
given transaction.  /26/

   Third, the "Corn Products doctrine" turns on motives, which
petitioner (Br. 12), following most of the decisions, suggests must be
the subjective motivation of the taxpayer.  The determination of such
a motive is usually an "uncertain and difficult" task for the fact
finder (Woodward v. Commissioner, 397 U.S. 572, 577 (1970)),
particularly when two or more motives are present that must be weighed
relative to each other.  And an inquiry into motives is particularly
obscure in the case of corporate motives, since corporate action
typically reflects decisions taken collectively by a number of
individuals.

   The result of a focus on subjective motive, moreover, is to make
capital-asset treatment almost elective with the taxpayer.  If the
taxpayer has a gain and wishes to have his asset treated as a capital
asset, there will be little basis for questioning his testimony that
it was acquired primarily as an investment.  Indeed, we are aware of
no reported decision that has applied the "Corn Products doctrine" to
require a taxpayer to report the gain from a sale of stock as an
ordinary gain.  On the other hand, if the taxpayer has a loss and
wishes to have his asset treated as an ordinary asset, it may not be
difficult for him to come up with a "business purpose" that will
satisfy some variant of the "Corn Products doctrine." Thus,
ironically, the doctrine developed by the lower courts in the name of
Corn Products presents taxpayers with the opportunity to choose
between ordinary and capital treatment -- precisely the "loophole"
that this Court in Corn Products was determined not to open (see 350
U.S. at 53-54).

   The instant litigation well illustrates the uncertainty that the
"Corn Products doctrine" has engendered.  The doctrine is sufficiently
open-ended that all of the following approaches to the sale of
petitioner's 661,000 shares of Bank stock have emerged during this
case:  (1) petitioner initially, when it expected to make a profit on
the sale of the Bank stock, believed, and so communicated to its
stockholders, that all of the shares would be capital assets whose
sale would give rise to capital gain (see Pet. App. B10);  (2) when
the Bank shares were in fact sold at a loss, petitioner took the
position that all of the shares were non-capital assets whose
disposition gave rise to ordinary loss;  (3) the Tax Court held that
most of the shares acquired after the end of 1972 were ordinary
assets, but that those acquired earlier were capital assets;  (4)
petitioner, on appeal, took the position that all of the shares
acquired after July 30, 1971 -- the date of its divestment election --
were ordinary assets;  and (5) it is the government's view (see pages
46-47, infra), that, even under the "Corn Products doctrine," all of
the shares should be categorized as capital assets.  A doctrine as
shapeless as this has "workability" (Pet. Br. 21) only in the sense
that it can be easily manipulated, and it should be rejected in favor
of the statutory language enacted by Congress.

   2. From this amalgam of disparate approaches and tests, petitioner
chooses the broadest formulation, and the one most favorable to it, as
the theory that should be adopted by this Court as the true "Corn
Products doctrine" (see Pet. Br. 43-48).  Petitioner maintains that an
asset should be "characterized as an ordinary, non-capital asset if
the dominant or primary motive for its acquisition was
business-related" (Br. 43).  This theory presents in exaggerated form
the conceptual difficulties, discussed above, that are common to all
of the tributaries of the "Corn Products doctrine."

   First, the clash between petitioner's version of the doctrine and
the statutory language is particularly marked.  The test proposed by
petitioner would render most of the exceptions specified in Section
1221 entirely superfluous.  If the mere existence of a primary
business purpose for acquiring property suffices to take that property
out of the definition of "capital asset," there was no need for
Congress to have enacted the specific exceptions for certain types of
business property in Section 1221(1), (2), and (4).  These types of
property, on petitioner's theory, would already have been excluded by
the general rule since their acquisition was business-related.

   Second, petitioner's theory that its Bank stock was not a capital
asset cannot be reconciled with an established line of authority
governing the treatment of securities in another context.  The courts
have consistently held that a "trader" -- one who buys and sells
securities for his own account -- is engaged in a "trade or business"
within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code.  Just last Term the
Court accorded this line of authority the express recognition that it
had implicitly granted 50 years ago.  See Commissioner v. Groetzinger,
No. 85-1226 (Feb. 24, 1987), slip op. 5-6 & 11 n.13;  Snyder v.
Commissioner, 295 U.S. 134 (1935).  It is also clear that the
securities that a trader buys and sells are capital assets.  See
Mirro-Dynamics Corp. v. United States, 374 F.2d 14 (9th Cir.), cert.
denied, 389 U.S. 896 (1967);  Commissioner v. Covington, 120 F.2d 768
(5th Cir. 1941);  Adnee v. Commissioner, 41 T.C. 40 (1963).  Indeed,
assuring that securities sold by a "trader" would be treated as
capital assets, while securities sold by a "dealer" would be excluded
under the inventory exception, was what prompted Congress to amend the
inventory exception in 1934 to cover only "property held for sale to
customers in the ordinary course of * * * trade or business" (emphasis
added).  See note 14, supra.  This well-established structure, of
course, is wholly inconsistent with petitioner's position here.  If a
trader is in a "trade or business," then the securities that he trades
are surely acquired for a purpose related to that business.  Hence,
under petitioner's view, those securities would presumably be
non-capital assets, in defiance of the law as it actually exists.

   3. In light of the chaos that has attended the lower courts'
efforts to expound a judicial exception to the statutory definition of
"capital asset," we believe it is important that this Court reaffirm
the primacy of the specific definition provided by Congress in Section
1221.  /27/ The court of appeals correctly held that the statutory
definition leaves no room for capital stock, other than stock held by
a dealer, to be treated as anything but a "capital asset." We thus
think it clear that, on the facts here, all of the shares sold by
petitioner in 1975 were "capital assets" and that the loss on that
sale was entirely a "capital loss." It should be noted, however, that
even under the various formulations of the "Corn Products doctrine,"
which we urge the Court to reject, it is highly questionable whether
any of petitioner's shares could be characterized as other than
capital assets.

   Nothing in the Tax Court's findings or in petitioner's brief
provides any basis for concluding that petitioner has satisfied the
Booth Newspapers requirement that the acquisition of the shares be "an
integral and necessary act in the conduct of (its) existing business"
(303 F.2d at 921).  To the contrary, the Tax Court's findings show
that the Bank was quite isolated from petitioner's existing businesses
-- furniture manufacturing, insurance, data processing and tire sales
-- and that the Bank, unlike petitioner's other subsidiaries, never
interacted with it in synergistic fashion.  See Pet. App. B7, B18-B19.
 Indeed, the Tax Court specifically stated that "(t)he bank was not an
integral and necessary part of (petitioner's) business" (id. at B19).

   Even under petitioner's version of the "Corn Products doctrine,"
which requires no more than a "dominant business motive" for a stock
purchase, petitioner's argument on these facts is highly dubious.  One
of the primary motives identified by the Tax Court for petitioner's
post-1972 acquisitions of Bank stock was that petitioner "was
compelled to participate (in capital calls) if it wished to preserve
its equity in the bank" (Pet. App. B10).  If the shares in the Bank
were originally purchased as an investment, as the Tax Court found
that they were, it is not apparent why further purchases to protect or
enhance that investment should be treated as having a business, rather
than investment, purpose.  In general, an asset acquired to preserve
one's existing assets ought to assume the same character as the assets
sought to be preserved -- in this case, capital assets.  Cf. United
States v. Generes, 405 U.S. 93 (1972) (bad debt incurred to protect
non-business investments is a non-business bad debt under Section
166(d)).  /28/ And, as noted earlier (see note 26, supra), even if the
dominant motive for petitioner's acquisition of Bank stock was to
preserve its business reputation (see Pet. App. B21), the fact that
expenses to preserve goodwill may normally be deducted does not mean
that stock acquired for that purpose is a non-capital asset.

                              CONCLUSION

   The judgment of the court of appeals should be affirmed.

   Respectfully submitted.

   CHARLES FRIED

      Solicitor General

   MICHAEL C. DURNEY

      Acting Assistant Attorney General

   ALBERT G. LAUBER, JR.

      Deputy Solicitor General

   ALAN I. HOROWITZ

      Assistant to the Solicitor General

   MICHAEL L. PAUP

   ERNEST J. BROWN

      Attorneys

   JULY 1987

   /1/ The Tax Court listed petitioner's acquisitions of Bank shares
during 1969-1974 as follows (Pet. App. B9;  see J.A. 9-12):

          Number of shares
   Year      acquired       Transaction
   1969      142,670        Two capital calls
   1969       24,188        Purchase
   1971       43,347        Stock dividend
   1972       19,072        Stock dividend
   1972       95,363        Capital call
   1972        6,165        Purchase
   1973       23,902        Stock dividend
   1973      103,887        Capital call
   1973          135        Purchase
   1974      124,664        Conversion of $3,116,610 principal
                             amount of convertible debentures,
                             which had been acquired in 1973 on
                             capital call
   1974        2,402        Purchase
   Total     585,795

   Some of the listed transactions that the Tax Court referred to as
capital calls were referred to in a stipulation of facts submitted by
the parties as exercises of stockholder preemptive rights (J.A. 9,
Paragraph 20).  Presumably, when added capital was required, shares
were offered to existing shareholders on a pro-rata basis.
Presumably, also, the stock dividends served the purpose of increasing
capital by capitalizing earnings.  That would explain why, although
petitioner more than tripled the number of shares that it owned during
this period, its percentage ownership increased only from 64.97% to
65.77%.

   /2/ The existence of these three reasons was a finding of fact made
by the Tax Court (Pet. App. B10-B11).  In its opinion, however, the
Tax Court made the somewhat contradictory statement that the post-1972
acquisitions were "solely to preserve (petitioner's) business
reputation" (id. at B21).

   /3/ At petitioner's annual stockholders' meeting in May 1974, the
Chairman of the Board noted that "the Bank is an investment for us"
and stated that petitioner expected a substantial profit upon the sale
of the Bank stock (Exh. P(AC), at 10, 11).  In addition, petitioner
listed the Bank stock under "Investments" on its federal income tax
returns for 1970-1975 (Exhs. 2B, 3C, 4D, 5E, 6F, 7G).

   /4/ Unless otherwise noted, all statutory references are to the
Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C.), as amended (the Code or I.R.C.).

   /5/ The court held that 2,402 shares acquired by petitioner from
Universal Insurance Co. (UIC) were a capital asset.  The court assumed
that UIC was not a subsidiary of petitioner at the time (Pet. App.
B21), and hence reasoned that petitioner's purchase from UIC could not
have served the business purpose of protecting a subsidiary from
regulatory sanctions.  We agree with petitioner (see Pet. Br. 7 n.4)
that this portion of the Tax Court's opinion rests on an erroneous
factual premise;  the parties stipulated (Exh. 1A) that UIC was
already a subsidiary of petitioner at the time of the purchase in
question.  We nevertheless believe, of course, that the court of
appeals correctly held that all 661,000 Bank shares sold in 1975,
including the 2,402 purchased from UIC, were capital assets.

   /6/ Petitioner therefore abandoned on appeal the claim it had
pressed in the Tax Court for ordinary-loss treatment for the Bank
shares acquired between June 1968 and July 30, 1971, the date it filed
its irrevocable divestment election with the Dallas Federal Reserve
Bank.

   /7/ In this regard, the court of appeals was not speaking of
securities held as inventory by a securities dealer;  it had earlier
noted (Pet. App. A5) that such securities would be excluded from the
definition of a "capital asset" under the exception for "inventory"
set forth in Section 1221(1).

   /8/ The present version of Section 1221 is set forth in its
entirety at pages 1-3, supra.  The version in effect in 1975, when
petitioner sold its Bank stock, contained a different exception (5),
relating to certain federal and state debt obligations issued on a
discount basis.  See 26 U.S.C. (1970 ed.) 1221(5).  That exception was
repealed by the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, Pub. L. No. 97-34,
Section 505(a), 95 Stat. 331.  The present exception (5), relating to
certain publications of the United States Government, was added by the
Tax Reform Act of 1976, Pub. L. No. 94-455, Section 2132(a), 90 Stat.
1925.  None of these changes, obviously, has any bearing on the
question presented here.

   /9/ Petitioner's discussion of the text of Section 1221 is limited
to a single footnote.  See Pet. Br. n.9.  Petitioner there suggests
that the five exceptions listed in Section 1221 are merely
illustrative of the types of property excluded from the general
definition of capital asset, not an exhaustive list of such property.
Petitioner invokes in support of this proposition Section 7701(c) of
the Code, which provides that "(t)he terms 'includes' and 'including'
when used in a definition contained in this title shall not be deemed
to exclude other things otherwise within the meaning of the term
defined." But Section 7701(c), which sets forth a common-sense rule of
statutory construction, is completely irrelevant here.  Section 1221
does not state that the category of non-capital assets "includes" the
five classes of property listed as exceptions.  The natural reading of
such a statute is that the body of Section 1221 establishes an
"exclusive definition" (Groman v. Commissioner, 302 U.S. 82, 86
(1937), and that the phrase "but does not include" takes out all of
that all-encompassing definition only what is specifically mentioned,
no more and no less.  For example, if a statute provided that "the
term 'protected species' means all animals but does not include dogs,"
it could not seriously be contended that the definition should be read
to exclude cats as well as dogs.

   /10/ Prior to 1924, the definition provided that "(t)he term
'capital assets' * * * means property acquired and held by the
taxpayer for profit or investment for more than two years (whether or
not connected with his trade or business), but does not include
property held for the personal use or consumption of the taxpayer or
his family * * * ." Revenue Act of 1921, ch. 136, Section 206(a)(6),
42 Stat. 233 (emphasis added).  The italicized language was deleted in
1924.  The effect of those deletions was to expand the category of
"capital assets" to include personal items not necessarily held for
profit, such as a taxpayer's personal residence.  Thus, the statutory
definition in 1921 did contain a distinction between for-profit and
investment use, on the one hand, and personal use, on the other.
Contrary to the statement of Amicus Kraft Co. (Br. 11-14), however,
the definition has never contained a distinction between investment
use and business use.

   /11/ The final clause of the inventory exception was amended in the
Revenue Act of 1934, ch. 277, Section 117(b), 48 Stat. 714, by adding
the phrase "to customers" to modify "sale," and by adding the word
"ordinary" to modify "course of his trade or business."

   /12/ The third exception, covering copyrights, musical
compositions, and other intellectual property, was added in 1950.
Revenue Act of 1950, ch. 994, Section 210(a), 64 Stat. 932.  The
current fifth exception was added in 1976.  See note 8, supra.  Its
predecessor, repealed in 1981, had been added by the Revenue Act of
1941, ch. 412, Section 115(b), 55 Stat. 698.

   /13/ Between 1921 and 1934, "capital assets" had been defined to
mean property that was "held by the taxpayer for more than two years."
See, e.g., Revenue Act of 1921, ch. 136, Section 206(a)(6), 42 Stat.
233;  Revenue Act of 1924, ch. 234, Section 208(a)(8) and (b), 43
Stat. 263;  Revenue Act of 1932, ch. 209, Section 101(a) and (c)(8),
47 Stat. 191, 192.

   /14/ The most notable modification was the amendment to the
"inventory" exception discussed briefly in note 11, supra.  In order
"to prevent tax avoidance" (S. Rep. 558, 73d Cong., 2d Sess. 12
(1934)), Congress changed the language of that exception to specify
that it covered only property "held by the taxpayer primarily for sale
to customers in the ordinary course of his trade or business"
(emphasis added).  The purpose of adding the italicized words was to
ensure that securities bought and sold by a "trader," i.e., someone
trading for his own account, would be treated as capital assets.
Securities bought and sold by a "dealer," by contrast, would continue
to fall within the inventory exception to the definition of "capital
asset." See H.R. Conf. Rep. 1385, 73d Cong., 2d Sess. 22 (1934);  4 J.
Mertens, Law of Federal Income Taxation Section 22.13, at 102 (1980).

   /15/ It bears mentioning that the Revenue Act of 1942, ch. 619,
Section 123(a)(1), 56 Stat. 820, added Section 23(g)(4) of the 1939
Code, the predecessor of the current Section 165(g)(3).  Section
165(g)(3) provides that when stock of a 80%-owned subsidiary
(formerly, a 95%-owned subsidiary) engaged in active business becomes
worthless, the stock of the subsidiary shall not be treated as a
capital asset.  The enactment of this provision is difficult to square
with petitioner's contention.  Obviously, this provision contemplates
that capital-asset treatment will continue to govern sales of stock in
a subsidiary, as well as situations where a subsidiary's stock becomes
worthless, yet the parent's percentage ownership is smaller than that
specified in Section 165(g)(3).  Under petitioner's view, these
limitations would evaporate as long as the acquisition of the
subsidiary's stock was business-connected.

   /16/ Although petitioner cites no direct evidence concerning the
intent of the Congress that enacted Section 1221, it does assert (Br.
35-40) that Congress's failure to amend that Section in later years,
so as to overturn the lower-court decisions following in the wake of
the Court of Claims' 1962 decision in Booth Newspapers, demonstrates
that those decisions must have correctly identified the original
intent of Congress.  As this Court had noted on many occasions,
however, "unsuccessful attempts at legislation are not the best of
guides to legislative intent." Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395
U.S. 367, 381-382 n.11 (1969).  See also Milwaukee v. Illinois, 451
U.S. 304, 332 n.24 (1981);  Bryant v. Yellen, 447 U.S. 352, 376
(1980).  Thus, even when the terms of a statute are ambiguous,
subsequent congressional inaction is an unreliable guide to the
intention of its original drafters;  that conclusiosn follows a
fortiori where, as here, the terms of the statute are perfectly plain.
 Petitioner's "congressional acquiescence" argument, moreover, is
particularly inapt in the present context, since the lower courts are
in complete disarray about the scope of the supposed judicial
exception to Section 1221.  See pages 36-40, infra.  Congress surely
has not "recognized and approved" (Pet. Br. 35) all of these
lower-court interpretations, which are mutually inconsistent.  Rather
than choosing some lower court decision to represent the governing
rule on the theory that Congress approved that decision through
inaction, the correct method of statutory interpretation is to focus
on the text of the statute and the intent of the Congress that enacted
it.

   /17/ In G.C.M. 17322, XV-4 C.B. 151-152 (1936), the Treasury
Department had issued an opinion as to "whether losses from hedging
futures transactions on commodity exchanges constitute 'capital
losses.'" The Department concluded that "hedging transactions are
essentially to be regarded as insurance rather than a dealing in
capital assets," and it gave examples of "true hedges against price
fluctuations in spot goods" (id. at 155;  see id. at 152).  The
results of such transactions were to be reflected in inventory
adjustments (id. at 153).  In view of the analysis adopted in the
Treasury opinion, courts at the time generally sought to determine
whether futures contracts were "capital assets" by inquiring whether
they represented "true hedges." See, e.g., Commissioner v. Farmers &
Ginners Cotton Oil Co., 120 F.2d 772, 774-775 (5th Cir. 1941);  Grote
v. Commissioner, 41 B.T.A. 247, 249 (1940).

   /18/ The Court noted that the taxpayer had asserted a conflict in
the circuits (350 U.S. at 47).  Each of the decisions that the Court
cited (id. at 47 n.3) involved the narrow question whether hedging
futures transactions on commodity exchanges were transactions in
"capital assets." See Trenton Cotton Oil Co. v. Commissioner, 147 F.2d
33 (6th Cir. 1945);  Commissioner v. Farmers & Ginners Cotton Oil Co.,
120 F.2d 772 (5th Cir. 1941);  Makransky's Estate v. Commissioner, 154
F.2d 59, (3d Cir. 1946) (per curiam).

   /19/ It cannot seriously be disputed that there was no need for
this Court in Corn Products to go beyond interpreting the specific
exceptions in the statute in order to affirm the judgment of the court
of appeals.  Even those who view Corn Products as creating a novel
judicial exception to the statute recognize that the inventory
exception provided an adequate basis for decision.  See, e.g., 2 B.
Bittker, Federal Taxation of Income, Estates and Gifts Paragraph
51.10.3, at 51-62 (1981) (approving "Corn Products doctrine," but
noting that this Court's decision in that case "could have been
reached with less strain by a narrower alternative rationale");  Kraft
Co. Amicus Br. 3.  The "Corn Products doctrine" thus rests on the
dubious assumption that the Court deliberately adopted a broad
rationale unnecessary to its decision in order to create a judicial
exception to Section 1221;  as we shall show, that assumption cannot
stand in the face of what the Court actually said in Corn Products
about the rationale of its holding.

   /20/ Petitioner quotes all but the opening sentence of the Court's
discussion on this point (Pet. Br. 16-17).  But to omit the opening
sentence, which explicitly states that the taxpayer's hedging
transactions were "within the exclusions of Section 117(a),"
inaccurately shifts the focus of the Court's discussion away from the
text of the statute.  See also, e.g., 2 B. Bittker, Federal Taxation
of Income, Estates, and Gifts Paragraph 51.10.3, at 51-62 (1981)
(making the same mistake);  W.W. Windle Co. v. Commissioner, 65 T.C.
694, 707 (1976) (same).  Viewed in its entirety, the Court's
discussion clearly focused on interpreting the specific exceptions in
the statute.

   /21/ The Court added that "practical considerations lead to the
same conclusion" (350 U.S. at 53).  If corn futures constituted
capital assets, yet raw corn constituted inventory, which is not a
capital asset, the Court explained that the hedger could choose
capital or ordinary tax treatment at will.  He could either sell the
futures and purchase in the spot market, thus getting capital
treatment;  or he could take delivery under the futures contract, thus
getting ordinary treatment.  In the words of the Court, such a state
of affairs would create a "loophole" that would "frustrate( )" the
congressional purpose (id. at 54).  Similar considerations led
Congress in 1954 to provide explicitly in Section 1234 that, for
purposes of capital gain and loss, an option should have the same
character as the property to which the option relates.  See H.R. Rep.
1337, 83d Cong., 2d Sess. A278-A279 (1954);  S. Rep. 1622, 83d Cong.,
2d Sess. 437-438 (1954).

   /22/ Petitioner errs in asserting (Br. 15-16) that the theory it
urges here is the position that was advanced in the government's brief
in Corn Products.  In arguing that the "exclusions from the capital
asset definition (should) be broadly applied" to cover transactions in
corn futures (Gov't Br. at 12, Corn Products Refining Co. v.
Commissioner, 350 U.S. 46 (1955), the government did argue that the
hedging transactions had to be analyzed in the context of the
taxpayer's manufacturing business.  And the brief did contain broad
language describing Congress's general intent to except from the
capital-asset definition certain everyday business expenses.  But the
brief recognized (id. at 17) that the relevant inquiry was "the proper
construction to be given to Code Section 117," and the thrust of the
brief was to defend the court of appeals' holding that hedging
transactions designed to assure an adequate supply of inventory fall
within the first statutory exception to the definition of "capital
asset." The government's brief did not urge, as does petitioner, that
the statutory definition can be ignored in favor of a
judicially-created doctrine that relies on an extra-statutory
distinction between "business" assets and "investment" assets.

   /23/ A stock acquisition designed to ensure a source of supply of a
necessary raw material, like that in Booth Newspapers, at least
arguably bore some "conceptual nexus" to the facts of Corn Products
itself.  See Waterman, Largen & Co. v. United States, 419 F.2d 845,
860, (Ct. Cl. 1969), cert. denied, 400 U.S. 869 (1970) (Nichols, J.,
dissenting).  But while such an equity investment could be viewed as
relating to inventory, we do not believe that it would fall within
even the broadest reading of the "inventory" exception contained in
Section 1221(1).  Stock that is held for several years cannot possibly
be included in the annual adjustments that are the reason for
inventory accounting, and such stock clearly is not "property of a
kind which would properly be included in the inventory of the taxpayer
if on hand at the close of the taxable year" (I.R.C. Section 1221(1).
The futures contracts at issue in Corn Products, moreover, represented
no more than rights to obtain the raw material and could "easily be
viewed as surrogates for the raw material itself" (2 B. Bittker,
supra, Paragraph 51.10.3, at 51-62).  Shares of stock, by contrast,
represent a bundle of rights associated with ownership of a company,
some of which have no connection to maintaining an inventory of a
particular raw material.

   /24/ See Agway, Inc. v. United States, 524 F.2d at 1204 (suggesting
that motive must be determined by examination of objective indicia).

   /25/ After this Court, over dissents by Justices Harlan, Stewart
and Blackmun, denied the government's petitions for certiorari in
Waterman and Steadman (400 U.S. 869 (1970)), the Commissioner found it
necessary to issue Revenue Rulings that reflected what appeared to be
the then-prevailing body of opinion in the lower courts.  See, e.g.,
Rev. Rul. 75-13, 1975-1 C.B. 67 (dominant business motive), superseded
by Rev. Rul. 78-94, 1978-1 C.B. 58 (stating that the Commissioner
would follow W.W. Windle Co. v. Commissioner, supra).

   /26/ The commingling of "business" and "investment" purposes is
perhaps most obvious in cases like Campbell Taggart, Inc. v. United
States, 744 F.2d 442 (5th Cir. 1984), where stock was held to be a
non-capital asset because it was acquired to protect the taxpayer's
"business reputation." The taxpayer there was a holding company "whose
sole activity (was) the acquisition of capital assets";  the court
stated that expenses to protect corporate goodwill are deductible
business expenses and concluded that the loss on the stock in question
had been incurred "to protect (the taxpayer's) goodwill and
reputation" as an acquirer of corporate securities (744 F.2d at
454-454).  In such a situation, it is obviously impossible to
segregate "business" from "investment" purposes.  A holding company
like the taxpayer in Campbell Taggart, or a conglomerate like the
taxpayer here, is in the "business" of making "investments," and the
business reputation it seeks to cultivate is that of an astute
investor.  That observation also points up the flaw in the reasoning
of the Fifth Circuit in Campbell Taggart and of the Tax Court in this
case.  The fact that expenses relating to an asset are "business
expenses" does not mean that the asset is therefore a non-capital
asset.  For example, if a taxpayer purchases property for use in a
trade or business over a period of years, the cost cannot be deducted
in full in the first year;  rather, the deduction must be spread out
over the useful life of the property, which is commonly referred to as
"capitalizing" the cost.  That has no bearing, however, on whether the
property is a "capital asset";  the answer to that question is
determined by Section 1221.

   /27/ This is not to suggest that all of the decisions issued under
the rubric of the "Corn Products doctrine" are equally misguided.
Some cases that do not stray too far from the facts of Corn Products
itself do not reach unreasonable results and theoretically could be
followed without creating an amorphous doctrine like Booth Newspapers
that quickly leads to untenable results.  For example, Western Wine &
Liquor Co. v. Commissioner, 18 T.C. 1090 (1952), seems to reflect the
proposition that a short-term purchase of stock or other asset for the
sole purpose of assuring an inventory supply should be treated the
same as the corn futures in Corn Products -- at least as long as the
stock is held no longer than necessary to accomplish its business
objective.  See 18 T.C. at 1099.  It may well be that, as a policy
matter, it makes sense not to treat such a purchase as a capital
transaction.  In light of the total disarray that has descended upon
the lower courts since Booth Newspapers established a judicial
doctrine untethered to the statutory text, however, we believe that
sensible administration of the tax laws requires future cases in this
area to be resolved only by reference to the terms of the statute.  We
therefore believe that the statutory exception for "inventory" should
not be expanded to include common stock -- which, unlike a commodity
futures contract, is not a surrogate for inventory -- and we
accordingly do not embrace the holding of Western Wine.  See 18 T.C.
at 1100 (Van Fossen, J., dissenting) (predicting that the divergence
from the statutory language approved in Western Wine "will rise to
plague the Court in future cases").  If it makes sense in policy terms
to treat as an ordinary asset either common stock or another class of
property used in a trade or business, Congress can act, as it did in
1938, 1942, and 1954, to add that specific class of business property
to the list of statutory exceptions.

   /28/ Petitioner errs in invoking Generes (Br. 46-47) to support its
contention that a "dominant motive test" should be employed to
distinguish between business and non-business assets for purposes of
Section 1221.  The Court in Generes was required to distinguish
between the business and non-business aspects of the taxpayer's
investment because the statute involved there, covering bad-debt
losses, explicitly distinguished between business and non-business bad
debts.  See I.R.C. Section 166(d).  If Section 1221 established a
similar dichotomy between business and non-business assets, the aspect
of Generes to which petitioner refers would be relevant.  In fact, of
course, Section 1221 does precisely the opposite;  the parenthetical
clause states that it makes no difference whether or not the asset is
used in a trade or business.
