   Federal Register / Vol. 58, No. 3 / Wednesday, January 6, 1993
   / Rules and Regulations
   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
   Food and Drug Administration
   
   
   21 CFR Part 101
   
   [Docket No. 91N - 0103]
   RIN 0905 - AB67
   
   
   Food Labeling: Health Claims and Label Statements: Omega-3
   Fatty Acids and Coronary Heart Disease
   
   AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.
   
   ACTION: Final rule.
   
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                       
   
   
   SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing
   its decision not to authorize the use on the label or labeling
   of foods of health claims relating to an association between
   omega-3 fatty acids and coronary heart disease (CHD).The
   agency has determined, based on: (1) The totality of the
   publicly available scientific evidence; and (2) the agency's
   review of comments received in response to its November 27,
   1991, proposed rule on omega-3 fatty acids and CHD, including
   scientific information included in those comments, that there
   is not significant scientific agreement among experts that
   such evidence supports a health claim for omega-3 fatty acids
   and CHD. Further, FDA has determined that the new information
   does not change the conclusions that the agency reached on the
   basis of the information reviewed in its proposal. Therefore,
   FDA has concluded that such a claim is not justified. This
   action is in response to provisions of the Nutrition Labeling
   and Education Act of 1990 (ts, published elsewhere in this
   issue of the Federal Register.
   
   EFFECTIVE DATE: May 8, 1993.
   
   FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: John C. Wallingford, Center
   for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS - 465), Food and
   Drug Administration, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 202
   - 205 - 5461.
   
   SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
   
   I. Background
   
       In the Federal Register of November 27, 1991 (56 FR
   60663), FDA proposed not to authorize a health claim relating
   diets high in omega-3 fatty acids to reduced risk of heart
   disease. The proposed rule was issued in response to
   provisions of the1990 amendments (Pub. L. 101 - 535) that bear
   on health claims and in accordance with the proposed general
   requirements for health claims for food (November 27, 1991, 56
   FR 60537). As amended in 1990, the Federal Food, Drug, and
   Cosmetic Act (the act) provides that a food is misbranded if
   it bears a claim that characterizes the relationship of a
   nutrient to a disease or health-related condition unless the
   claim is made in accordance with section 403(r)(3) or
   (r)(5)(D) of the act (21 U.S.C. 343(r)(3) or(r)(5)(D)).
       Congress enacted the health claims provisions of the 1990
   amendments to help U.S. consumers maintain good health through
   appropriate dietary patterns and to protect consumers from
   unfounded health claims. Section 3(b)(1)(A) of the 1990
   amendments specifically requires the agency to determine
   whether health claims for 10 nutrient-disease relationships
   meet the requirements of section 403(r)(3) or (r)(5)(D) of the
   act. The relationship of omega-3 fatty acids and heart disease
   is one of the claims required to be evaluated. In the Federal
   Register of March 28, 1991 (56 FR 12932), FDA published a
   notice requesting scientific data and information on the 10
   specific topic areas identified in the 1990 amendments.
   Relevant scientific studies and datareceived in response to
   this request were considered as part of the agency's review of
   the scientific literature on omega-3 fatty acids and CHD and
   were included in the proposed rule.
       In addition, on January 30 and 31, 1992, FDA held public
   hearings on all aspects of the proposed rules (57 FR 239).
       FDA requested in the Federal Register of November 27, 1991
   (56 FR 60663), written comments in response to its proposed
   rule. FDA reviewed all of the comments it received, including
   new data submitted in the comments, and scientific articles
   referred to in the comments. FDA also reviewed additional
   scientific articles, reviews, and recommendations published
   from August 1991 through February 1992.
       The Dietary Supplement Act of 1992 (DS Act) established a
   moratorium on the implementation of the 1990 amendments with
   respect to dietary supplements. The DS Act says that FDA can
   grant health claims for food, including dietary supplements,
   under section 403(r)(3)(B)(i) of the act. However, it may not
   act on such claims under section 403(r)(5)(D) of the act until
   it establishes a standard to implement that section of the
   act, which the DS Act says may not occur until December 1993.
   Section 3(b)(1)(A)(x) of the 1990 amendments directs the
   agency to evaluate the omega-3 fatty acids/CHD claims based on
   the standard that FDA is establishing for determining the
   reliability of health claims under section 403(r)(5)(D) of the
   act. In the November 27, 1991, proposal on general
   requirements for health claims, FDA proposed to adopt the
   standard that the 1990 amendments provide for conventional
   foods, which is set forth in section 403(r)(3)(B)(i) of the
   act, as the standard for dietary supplements. Given this fact,
   and the fact that omega-3 fatty acids are found in numerous
   conventional foods as well as in dietary supplements, FDA
   broadened its inquiry to a determination as to whether it
   should grant a health claim on omega-3 fatty acids and CHD for
   any foods
       Because the DS Act provides that FDA may grant claims
   using the significant scientific agreement standard specified
   in section 403(r)(3)(B)(i) of the act, and given the breadth
   of FDA's November 1991, proposal on omega-3 fatty acids, FDA
   has decidedto move forward to determine whether it can
   authorize a claim under section 403(r)(3)(B)(i) for omega-3
   fatty acids and CHD.
       However, this rule does not apply to dietary supplements.
   While a manufacturer of a dietary supplement can make a claim
   on omega-3 fatty acids and CHD without rendering its product
   misbranded under section 403(r)(1)(B) of the act, the
   manufacturer should assure itself that the making of the claim
   will not misbrand the product under section 403(a).
   
   II. Summary of Comments and the Agency's Response
   
       FDA received 80 letters, each containing one or more
   comments, from consumers, health care professionals,
   universities and research institutes, health profession
   associations, consumer advocacy organizations, State and local
   governments, foreign governments, trade organizations,
   industry, and professional organizations. In addition to these
   comments, the agency also considered statements made on
   omega-3 fatty acids and CHD at the January 30 and 31, 1992,
   public hearings. Some of the comments agreedwith one or more
   of the aspects of the proposed rule, without providing further
   grounds for support other than those provided by FDA in the
   preamble to the proposal. Other comments disagreed with one or
   more aspect of the proposal without providing specific grounds
   for the disagreement. A few comments addressed issues outside
   of the scope of this document and will not be discussed in
   this document. Most of the comments provided specific grounds
   in support of their positions concerning aspects of this
   health claim as proposed. The agency has summarized and
   addressed the issues raised in the sections of this document
   that follow.
   
   A. General Comments
   
   1. Definition of omega-3 fatty acids and composition of
   omega-3 fatty acid supplements
       1. One comment criticized the definition of omega-3 fatty
   acids used in the proposed rule, on the basis that omega-3
   fatty acids were not distinguished from other polyunsaturated
   fatty acids (PUFA's).
       In the proposed rule, FDA limited the term omega-3 fatty
   acids to eicosapentaenoic acid ((EPA), 20 carbons, 5 double
   bonds) and docosahexaenoic acid ((DHA), 22 carbons, 6 double
   bonds) (56 FR 60663 at 60664). FDA noted that most of the
   relevant research has used fish or fish oils rich in these two
   fatty acids.
       FDA acknowledges that its statement defining omega-3 fatty
   acids did not explicitly refer to omega-3 fatty acids. The
   sentence: ``Their unique characteristic is the location of the
   first double bond, which occurs at the third carbon from the
   methyl (or omega) end of the fatty acid.'' (56 FR 60663 at
   60664) was intended to refer to omega-3 fatty acids. This
   definition distinguishes omega-3 fatty acids from other
   PUFA's, which have their first unsaturation at the sixth or
   ninth carbon from the omega end of the fatty acid.
       2. One comment argued that the definition of omega-3 fatty
   acids should include land-based (primarily plant) omega-3
   fatty acids (i.e., linolenic acid). (For the purposes of this
   document, the term linolenic acid is used to indicate the
   omega-3 fatty acid, alpha linolenic acid. In contrast, gamma
   linolenic acid has its first double bond at the sixth carbon
   from the omega end of the fatty acid, and is not an omega-3
   fatty acid.)
       FDA disagrees with this comment. FDA defined omega-3 fatty
   acids as EPA and DHA, primarily as a functional definition
   derived from the scientific literature. The hypothesis for a
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD derived from
   correlations between low rates of CHD and high consumption of
   fish oils. Similarly, most of the intervention studies have
   used fish oil or fish as a source of EPA and DHA, not plant
   oils rich in linolenic acid. The comment provided no evidence
   that linolenic acidRef. 100). Therefore, FDA believes it has
   represented the potential nutrient-disease relationship
   appropriately by limiting its attention to EPA and DHA.
       3. Two comments stated that FDA's position on fish as
   opposed to the omega-3 fatty acids in fish was a tautology,
   because: ``if polyunsaturated fatty acids have beneficial
   effects on CHD, and if fish oils are a member of this class of
   fatty acids, it should not be counted against their beneficial
   effects on CHD.''
       FDA disagrees with this comment. FDA considers the claim
   for omega-3 fatty acids to reflect the unique biochemistry of
   these fatty acids. In particular, the prevailing theory about
   the mode of action of omega-3 fatty acids is that they compete
   with omega-6 fatty acids (fatty acids with their first double
   bond at the sixth carbon from the methyl end, and which
   comprise the largest amount of dietary PUFA's). Thus, a clear
   separation of effects of omega-3 fatty acids from effects of
   other (primarily omega-6) PUFA's is needed to support a claim.
       4. One comment stated that FDA did not consider the
   importance of the ratio of omega-3 fatty acids to arachidonic
   acid (AA), a 20 carbon omega-6 PUFA with four double bonds,
   and stated that evidence exists for a relationship between the
   saturated fat:unsaturated fat ratio in the diet and the
   omega-6:omega-3 fatty acid ratio in the diet and the risk of
   CHD.
       FDA considers concerns about the ratio of AA to omega-3
   fatty acids and the ratio of omega-6 fatty acids to omega-3
   fatty acids to be reasonable in view of the competition
   between these classes of fatty acids in human biochemistry.
   FDA considered all types of foods and supplements used to
   provide omega-3 fatty acids in its evaluation of the claim.
   Although the AA content of the supplement was often reported,
   studies did not report data for total dietary AA. FDA is aware
   of only very limited data regarding the ratios of AA to
   omega-3 fatty acids, and of the omega-6 fatty acid:omega-3
   fatty acid ratio in the diet and the risk of CHD. Therefore,
   it is not possible for FDA to draw any conclusions about these
   ratios and their possible modifying effectson the omega-3
   fatty acids CHD health claim.
       However, because the fish oils used contained high
   concentrations of omega-3 fatty acids, FDA believes that the
   amounts of fish oils supplemented to the various test diets
   would have affected the AA:omega-3 fatty acid ratio and the
   omega-6:omega-3 fatty acid ratio of the diets to some extent.
   FDA advises that interested persons may petition FDA under
   101.70 (21 CFR 101.70) to issue a regulation regarding a
   health claim that relates these ratios to the risk of CHD.
       5. Another comment pointed out that supplements used
   currently have contained various amounts of short- and
   long-chain omega-3 fatty acids and that many supplements also
   contain saturated fat. The comment stated that some of the
   discrepancies in reported findings may be due to the type of
   supplement used.
       FDA agrees that numerous supplements varying in fatty acid
   composition have been used, and that the variation in the
   fatty acid composition of supplements may have influenced the
   outcome. FDA reexamined the studies cited in its proposal and
   the newdata submissions for evidence that the nature of the
   supplement used was related to the outcome. However, the
   agency found that the same results are observed regardless of
   the source of omega-3 fatty acids. For example, in eight
   well-designed studies cited in the proposal on the total serum
   cholesterol response among normal subjects (Refs. 6, 9, 14,
   49, 54, 73, 156, and 166), six different sources of omega-3
   fatty acids were used: Salmon oil, SuperEPA, MaxEPA, a fish
   oil triglyceride, Promega, and mackerel paste. None of these
   supplements produced a change in total serum cholesterol.
   Similarly, four different sources of omega-3 fatty acids
   (fresh water fish, salmon oil, purified EPA, MaxEPA) were
   shown in seven well-designed studies to reduce platelet a
       FDA did note that some differences in response have been
   produced by supplements that vary in ratio of EPA to DHA. For
   example, one fish oil (pollock oil) with a high EPA:DHA ratio
   increased low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, LDL
   triglyceride and apoprotein B (apoB) (a protein component of
   LDL) in comparison to a butter-rich diet, but two fish oils
   with a low EPA:DHA ratio (tuna oil, salmon oil with added
   palmitic acid) reduced apoB and LDL cholesterol, and increased
   LDL triglyceride to a smaller extent than the pollock oil in
   comparison to the butter-rich diet (Ref. 17). However, the
   effects of the two major omega-3 fatty acids have not yet been
   systematically investigated. FDA recognizes that purified EPA
   and DHA are now available for research; such supplements will
   enable the study of the individual effects of these fatty
   acids.
       6. One comment stated that conservation of omega-3 fatty
   acids in the body calls into question the importance of the
   amounts of omega-3 fatty acids used in scientific studies.
   However, the comment did not suggest any alternate method to
   describe intake.
       FDA recognizes that fish is not ordinarily consumed daily.
   However, the 1990 amendments require that health claims on
   foods be stated in such a way as to enable the public to
   understand the relative significance of such information in
   the context ofa total daily diet (section 403(r)(3)(B)(iii) of
   the act). Thus, a reasonable estimate of daily dietary intake
   of omega-3 fatty acids is needed when assessing the
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and the risk of CHD.
   Most of the studies reviewedby the agency used daily
   supplementation with a known amount of omega-3 fatty acids,
   but others estimated intake of omega-3 fatty acids from foods
   consumed in the daily diet. Both types of intake estimates are
   important. Daily supplementation is useful to relate changes
   to a carefully controlled amount of omega-3 fatty acids. The
   average daily intake of omega-3 fatty acids in nonintervention
   studies provides a basis upon which to determine whether the
   amounts of omega-3 fatty acids fed in supplementation studies
   are reasonable in the context of the total daily diet.
   2. Criteria used in evaluating studies
       In the proposed rule, FDA listed some of the criteria used
   in evaluating epidemiological studies on the relationship of
   omega-3 fatty acids to CHD: (1) The reliability and accuracy
   of the methods used in food intake analysis and measurements
   of disease endpoints, (2) the choice of control subjects, (3)
   the representativeness of the subjects, (4) the control of
   confounding factors in data analysis, (5) the potential for
   misclassification of individuals with regard to dietary
   exposure or disease endpoints, (6) the presence of bias, and
   (7) the degree of compliance and how compliance was assessed
   (56 FR 60667).
       However, FDA stated that it considered randomized,
   double-blind, placebo-controlled trials to be more valuable
   than other types of human studies because they were less
   susceptible to bias, and because they allowed inference about
   the specific effects of omega-3 fatty acids. Studies in which
   the endpoint was CHD, by definition, provide the most
   persuasive type of evidence, but studies measuring CHD to date
   have not provided the specificity to show that the observed
   effects were due to omega-3 fatty acids.
       7. Some comments expressed the concern that it was
   unlikely that additional clinical trials will be done due to
   their expense, and that, therefore, FDA should rely more
   heavily on epidemiologic studies, animal studies, and
   biochemical and physiological interventions that suggest an
   effect of omega-3 fatty acids on risk of CHD.
       FDA has no basis upon which to agree or disagree with the
   comments' assertion that further clinical trials are unlikely.
   FDA disagrees that its emphasis on clinical trials was
   misplaced. Because the 1990 amendments addressed
   nutrient-disease relationsdemonstrate that the effects are
   specifically due to omega-3 fatty acids. Human studies in
   which a surrogate marker for CHD risk was measured as the
   endpoint of the treatment were also considered carefully. The
   advantage of these studies is that they are able to
   demonstrate specificity of the effects due to omega-3 fatty
   acids. However, the relationships between many of these
   surrogate markers and risk of CHD are not well established,
   making it difficult to relate changes in these endpoints
   brought about by omega-3 fatty acids to the risk of disease.
   Biologic markers can serve as markers of a developing disease,
   but the relevance of such evidence depends directly on the
   strength of the association between the marker and the disease
   (Ref. 115).
       FDA agrees that there are considerable additional data in
   animal studies, in vitro studies, and biochemical and
   physiological interventions regarding the effects of omega-3
   fatty acids. However, it is not clear that the results of such
   studies are relevant to the risk of human disease. Thus, FDA
   believes that these other types of data are of secondary
   importance compared to clinical data that measure either CHD
   per se or established surrogate markers for CHD.
       However, in response to the comments, FDA has provided a
   more thorough description of animal and in vitro studies that
   suggest a role for omega-3 fatty acids in reducing the risk of
   CHD, particularly with respect to the effects of omega-3 fatty
   acids on the development of atherosclerosis and with respect
   to the responsiveness of blood vessels to ischemia (see
   comments 38 and 49 and section II.C.3.a. of this document).
       8. Many comments stated that the agency's position on
   omega-3 fatty acids and CHD was inconsistent with its position
   on other health claims, and argued that for each of the four
   claims proposed to be allowed by FDA, the data were no
   stronger than the data supporting the link between omega-3
   fatty acids and CHD. The comments asserted that, by basing its
   decision on the relationship between the nutrient and a
   surrogate marker for the disease, or for a susceptible
   subpopulation, FDA held other claims to a less restrictive
   standard. One comment stated: ``The FDA statement is
   internally consistent in denying health claims for omega-3
   fatty acids, but this is only in the context of holding these
   food components to essentially impossible standards not
   required for other, allowable, claims.''
       Specific comparisons were made to the proposed claims on
   fat and CHD, fat and cancer, calcium and osteoporosis, and
   sodium and hypertension. Other comments indicated that
   qualified claims, such as that for calcium and osteoporosis,
   were appropriate models for the claim relating omega-3 fatty
   acids to CHD.
       FDA disagrees with these comments. FDA believes that for
   these other claims there is significant scientific agreement
   among qualified experts regarding the relationship between the
   nutrient and the disease, whereas there is not such agreement
   regarding the relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and
   CHD, or between omega-3 fatty acids and agreed surrogate
   markers for risk of CHD. For example, based on the totality of
   the publicly available scientific evidence, FDA determined
   that there is significant scientific agreement about the role
   of calcium in maintaining bone mineral density (the
   relationship of the nutrient to the intermediate marker for
   the disease), and about the relationship between peak
   (maximal) bone mass and the risk of developing osteoporosis
   and related bone fractures later in life (the relationship
   between the intermediate marker and the disease itself) (see
   56 FR 60689; see also the final rule on calcium and
   osteoporosis published elsewhere in this issue of the Federal
   Register). Similarly, FDA relied on a long history of Federal
   Government and other consensus statements to conclude that
   there is significant scientific agreement about the role of
   sodium as a causal factor in hypertension for a segment of the
   population. (Srtension, published elsewhere in this issue of
   the Federal Register.) FDA also recognized the history of
   significant scientific agreement about the relationships
   between fat and cancer and between fat and CHD evidenced by
   statements in reports issued by Federal Government and other
   authoritative bodies. (See 56 FR 60764, 56 FR 60726; see also
   final rules on fat and cancer and fat and CHD, published
   elsewhere in this issue of the Federal Register.).
       Thus, these other nutrient-disease relationships have a
   history of being recognized in Federal Government and
   authoritative reports, indicating significant scientific
   agreement, whereas the relationship between omega-3 fatty
   acids and CHD has not been so recognized. For two of these
   other nutrient-disease relationships, the data relate to the
   disease itself, rather than to markers for the disease. In the
   other two, calcium and osteoporosis and fat and CHD, there is
   significant scientific agreement that the dietary factors are
   related to surrogate markers for the diseases, and that the
   surrogate markers are related to the diseases.
       There is significant scientific agreement that serum
   cholesterol and blood pressure are risk factors for CHD, as
   indicated by the emphasis on these factors in Federal
   Government and other authoritative documents (Refs. 34 through
   36, 100, 115, and 169). Data regarding the effects of omega-3
   fatty acids on these endpoints have been carefully reviewed.
   However, the other endpoints measured in studies of the
   effects of omega-3 fatty acids, e.g., in vitro platelet
   aggregation, various growth factors, fibrinogen, have not
   achieved the same extent of scientific agreement.
       Where authorized health claims include qualifications, the
   qualifications are intended to assure that the wording of
   allowed claims reflects those particular aspects of the
   substance-disease relationship for which there is significant
   scientific agreement, not to qualify the extent of agreement.
       9. Some comments stated that FDA relied heavily on
   material published in the National Academy of Sciences 1989
   report, ``Diet and Health: Implications for Reducing Chronic
   Disease Risk'' (Ref. 115) and the Surgeon General's 1988
   report (Ref. 34), and did not place enough emphasis on
   information published since that time.
       FDA acknowledges that the two reports in question were
   important to its assessment of the scientific evidence.
   However, the agency does not agree that it failed to give
   appropriate weight to subsequently published research. The
   1990 amendments required the agency to consider the totality
   of publicly available scientific evidence in assessing
   nutrient-disease relationships. Given the time constraints
   imposed by the 1990 amendments for developing and publishing
   proposed regulations, FDA depended on Federal Government
   reports and reports of authoritative bodies (e.g, the National
   Academy of Sciences) for assessment of the scientific evidence
   published before 1988. The reports were also used as a way of
   determining whether there was significant scientific agreement
   among qualified experts that the evidence supports a
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD. The agency's
   reliance on these reports is consistent with the 1990
   amendments, which require the agency to consider reports from
   authoritative scientific bodies of the United States in
   assessing health claim petitions and to justify any decision
   rejecting the conclusions of such reports (section
   403(r)(4)(C) of the act).
       Recognizing, however, that considerable research had been
   published since these reports, and that these reports had not
   been updated, FDA also reviewed the available studies on
   humans published since 1988. FDA relied on its own review of
   individual studies rather than review articles, because review
   articles generally reflect the bias of the author and may not
   consider the totality of the evidence. FDA focused its
   independent review on primary papers published between January
   1988 and August 1991. Sulished before 1988 and used to
   generate the hypothesis of a relationship between omega-3
   fatty acids and CHD were also reexamined. Thus, by utilizing
   the two reports in question, supplemented with an independent
   review of the subsequently published research, FDA was able to
   assess the totality of the scientific evidence on omega-3
   fatty acids and CHD in compliance with the statutory standard.
       10. One comment suggested that FDA was inconsistent with
   the conclusions of the major reviews of this area, published
   after the Federal Government and other comprehensive reports.
   They stated that of the nine major reviews (excluding
   Kinsella, and Connor and Connor), eight concluded that omega-3
   fatty acids played a beneficial role with factors affecting
   heart disease.
       Although FDA did not rely on review articles to assess the
   strength of association between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD,
   each review was read, and the agency interprets these reviews
   as supporting the hypothesis in concept. However, each review
   contained reservations about the extent to which the
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD was
   established. The cautionary statements suggest general
   agreement that the area of omega-3 fatty acids and CHD holds
   promise for further research along a number of lines, but
   that, at present, there are not sufficient data to have
   certainty about the relationship between omega-3 fatty acids
   and CHD. Placed in chronological order, the concluding
   sections from the cited review articles exemplify the lack
   ofcertainty as to the relationship between omega-3 fatty acids
   and risk of CHD.
       The review of the relationship between omega-3 fatty acids
   and CHD by Leaf and Weber (Ref. 91) was considered in the
   National Academy of Sciences' ``Diet and Health: Implications
   for Reducing Chronic Disease Risk'' report (Ref. 115). FDA
   elected to include the Leaf and Weber review in its citations
   because it covered, in the most comprehensive manner of all
   available reviews, the state of scientific knowledge about
   omega-3 fatty acids in CHD at the time the Federal Government
   and other comprehensive reviews were published. Leaf and Weber
   wrote: ``Despite claims that n-3 fatty acids can help prevent
   atherosclerosis, recommendations to the public on diet have
   been conservative; people have been advised to increase their
   consumption of fish by replacing two or three meals a week
   containing red meat with meals containing fish.'' Their
   concluding sentence was: ``If prospective double-blind,
   placebo-controlled clinical trials were to show that n-3 fatty
   acids helped to prevent atherosclerosis, these agents
   apparently would represent one of the most benign
   interventions in our pharmacopeia.'' (Emphasis added.)
       Bonaa (Ref. 10) wrote in his conclusion that the data on
   blood pressure:
   
       * * * provide some support for the hypothesis that dietary
   marine lipids influence blood pressure in man. Supplementation
   of n-3 PUFAs [polyunsaturated fatty acids] to Western diets
   consistently lowered systolic blood pressure, while results
   fordiastolic blood pressure were conflicting * * *. There is
   no evidence of any substantial hypotensive response to marine
   lipids and further studies should be designed to detect small
   effects.
   
       Lands (Ref. 89) did not review the relationship between
   omega-3 fatty acids and any specific disease, but presented
   the hypothesis that the balance of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty
   acids in the diet may be related to diseases associated with
   overproduction of eicosanoids from AA. He indicates in the
   introduction that, ``We are now in an uncertain time of
   evaluating the benefits and risks of dietary n-6 and n-6
   polyunsaturated fats.''
       Weber (Ref. 161) concluded:
   
       The promise of n-3 fatty acids deduced from biochemical
   and functional effects will have to be evaluated in ongoing
   and future carefully designed and conducted studies. So far,
   published data of controlled clinical trials incorporating
   clinical enochemical and functional effects of dietary fatty
   acids assumed to be of clinical benefit in the prevention of
   atherothrombotic and allergic/inflammatory disorders is only
   beginning to be closed. (Emphasis added.)
   
       Connor and Connor (Ref. 21) wrote in their summary:
   
       The exact place of omega-3 fatty acids from fish and fish
   oil remains to be defined. However, this much seems certain.
   Fish provides an excellent substitute for meat in the diet.
   Fish is lower in fat, especially saturated fat, and contains
   the omega-3 fatty acids. Fish oil may have promise as a
   therapeutic agent in certain hyperlipidemic states, especially
   the chylomicronemia of type V hyperlipidemia. Fish oil has
   logical and well-defined antithrombotic and
   antiatherosclerotic activities since it depresses thromboxane
   A2 production and inhibits cellular proliferation responsible
   for the progression of atherosclerosis. As the years pass and
   more experiments are reported, it seems reasonable to place
   the omega-3 fatty acids from fish oil in a prominent position
   for specific hypolipidemic, antithrombotic and
   antiatherosclerotic activity.
   
       Kinsella et al. (Ref. 82) wrote:
   
       The cumulative findings concerning fish oils suggest that
   further amelioration of coronary heart disease may be feasible
   by dietary manipulation and by optimizing the intake of n-6
   and n-3 PUFAs, not only to reduce plasma lipids but to ensure
   balanced eicosanoid metabolism--a prospect that deserves more
   research * * *. Overall, in view of the prevalence of coronary
   heart disease, consumption of n-3 PUFA oils should be
   considered as a useful complementary option for the
   amelioration of coronary vascular diseases.
   
       Knapp (Ref. 84) introduced his paper stating: ``The role
   of dietary polyunsaturated fats in the prevention of human
   vascular disease has not been defined, but population and
   intervention studies have suggested that w-3 fatty acids (FAs)
   from marine lipids may have a number of potentially beneficial
   effects.'' (Emphasis added.) And in conclusion he wrote: ``The
   proof of our hypotheses must be derived from increasingly
   ambitious clinical trials, which assess the potential benefits
   of dietary polyunsaturates in particular clinical settings;
   the recent demonstration that three helpings of oily fish per
   week prolongs survival after MI (Ref. 16) is an example of
   this.'' (Emphasis added.)
       Nestel (Ref. 111) concluded: ``More basic understanding of
   the actions of fish oils is necessary before fish oils can be
   recommended widely to the public.''
       Nordoy and Goodnight (Ref. 112) cautioned that until
   additional data become available, ``clinicians should be
   advised to follow the dietary recommendations of the National
   Cholesterol Education Program's expert panel,'' which is
   silent on omega-3 fatty acids and limits the total
   polyunsaturated fat to 10 percent of calories. These reviewers
   added their own recommendation that omega-6/omega-3 ratio of
   the PUFA's be approximately 3/1, with the omega-3 fatty acids
   from marine sources.
       Weber and Leaf (Ref. 162) stated:
   
       Despite all the laboratory, human, animal, and
   epidemiologic studies suggesting an anti-atheromatous action
   of w3 fatty acids, we have been lacking adequate clinical
   trials which will determine in prospective,
   placebo-controlled, randomized studies, whether all the above
   experimental and epidemiologic evidence adds up to a
   demonstrable effect of fish oils to prevent atherosclerosis,
   e.g., coronary heart disease in humans at high risk for heart
   attacks.
   
       The Burr paper (Ref. 16) was described in Weber and Leaf's
   review, and thus was considered in the above summary
   statement.
       In summary, these reviews indicate that what is agreed is
   that there is a plausible biochemical basis for a relationship
   between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD, and that there are some
   data supporting some of the hypothesized mechanisms by which
   omega-3ding statements, is that such a relationship already
   has been established by the evidence.
       11. A concern raised by many comments was that FDA's
   conclusions were different from the conclusions reached in the
   report from the Life Sciences Research Office (LSRO) of the
   Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology
   (Ref. 100), themost recent comprehensive review, and that FDA
   did not explain why it reached a different conclusion from
   that reached in the LSRO report.
       The LSRO report was contracted for by FDA as an
   independent review of the scientific evidence about the
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD. A draft of
   the tentative final report was received immediately prior to
   the publication of the proposed rule. Thus, there was
   insufficient time for the agency to prepare a detailed
   discussion of the report. The final report was submitted to
   FDA as a comment to the proposal. The LSRO report's
   conclusions on hypertension, thrombosis, the developmentof
   atherosclerotic plaque and intimal hyperplasia, plasma lipids
   and lipoproteins, diabetic and prediabetic patients, and
   epidemiologic observations are grouped with other comments on
   these topics and discussed in this document.
       12. One comment considered FDA's caution against
   extrapolation of results from studies conducted in at-risk
   populations to the general population to be questionable, and
   possibly biased against hypertensives. The comment stated that
   the health claimshould be allowed, based on data showing that
   omega-3 fatty acids reduce blood pressure among hypertensives.
       FDA disagrees with this comment. FDA stated that, although
   it considered studies in the healthy population to be the most
   relevant, it also considered studies in a subpopulation with
   CHD or risk factors for CHD, in part because high risk
   populationsmay be more sensitive to showing a nutrient-disease
   relationship than the general population (56 FR 60663 at
   60667). FDA stated that it extrapolated positive results from
   at-risk populations cautiously, and that comparable findings
   in the general population were needed to support a health
   claim.
       13. Two comments discussed FDA's criteria for weighing
   various types of data. One comment stated that epidemiologic
   data are the ``most significant class of evidence,'' and that
   FDA should give priority to various types of data in the same
   order that various types of data were reviewed in the
   proposal. One comment stated that FDA should not have
   considered epidemiological studies separately from clinical
   trials.
       FDA considered the totality of publicly available
   scientific evidence in its assessment of the relationship of
   omega-3 fatty acids to CHD. However, some types of evidence
   were weighted more heavily than others because they were more
   useful in establishing whether or not the scientific basis of
   the claim was valid. In particular, the agency was concerned
   that both the substance (omega-3 fatty acids) and the disease
   (CHD) be carefully characterized. FDA also considered it
   important that the amount ofomega-3 fatty acids tested was
   reasonably related to normal dietary intake, and that the
   findings apply to the general population. FDA agrees that
   epidemiologic studies in which the endpoint was CHD provide
   persuasive evidence for a relationship betweenfish consumption
   and CHD, but these studies did not provide the specificity to
   show that the observed effects were due to omega-3 fatty
   acids. Intervention trials using fish oil supplements often
   showed that the effects were specific to omega-3 fatty acids
   (by controlling with other types of fatty acids) but typically
   did not measure the primary endpoint, CHD. Thus, these
   different types of data complement each other and must be
   considered together in assessing the totality of the
   scientific evidence.
       14. One comment offered the services of the International
   Society for the Study of Fatty Acids and Lipids for the
   evaluation of the relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and
   CHD.
       FDA appreciates this offer. In the final rule on general
   requirements for health claims published elsewhere in this
   issue of the Federal Register, FDA advises that it welcomes
   the input of any professional organization that can provide
   expertise in reviewing data and in developing a thoughtful and
   well-organized petition for a health claim on a particular
   topic. In fact, FDA has added to 101.70(b) the provision that
   information submitted with petitions may include any findings,
   along withthe basis of the findings, of an outside panel with
   expertise in the subject area at issue. FDA, however, retains
   the authority to review such petitions and, through
   rulemaking, to decide whether or not to authorize the claim.
       15. Two comments stated that it was contradictory for the
   U.S. Government to contract for research on the omega-3 fatty
   acids through the biologic test materials program but not to
   allow a health claim. Another comment pointed out that the
   Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health
   Organization support research on omega-3 fatty acids. Other
   comments stated that the tone of FDA's proposed rule was
   unduly negative and that, by taking such a position, FDA may
   retard further research.
       FDA disagrees that Federal Government sponsorship of a
   program to provide test materials for research on the effects
   of omega-3 fatty acids and the denial of the omega-3 fatty
   acid-CHD health claim are contradictory actions. The purpose
   of the biologic test materials program is to develop and
   standardize a source of omega-3 fatty acids and enable
   carefully controlled research on the effects of particular
   omega-3 fatty acids. In the proposed rule, FDA's intent was to
   examine the total available scientificevidence, some of which
   was generated using omega-3 fatty acids from the biologic
   materials test program, and to state its conclusions about the
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD.
       In its proposal and in this final rule, FDA has identified
   a number of areas where agreement is lacking that an observed
   effect of omega-3 fatty acids is related to the risk of CHD,
   or where there are ambiguities in the data that may be
   resolved by further research. Thus, FDA's analysis should
   provide guidance for additional research rather than inhibit
   it.
   
   B. Relationship Between Omega-3 Fatty Acids and CHD
   
       In the proposed rule, FDA tentatively concluded that the
   totality of the scientific evidence does not provide a basis
   upon which to authorize a claim that omega-3 fatty acids are
   associated with the risk of CHD (56 FR 60663). FDA noted that:
   
       the epidemiological research on this topic revealed that
   the available studies applied only to the consumption of fish,
   which contain omega-3 fatty acids, and * * * it was not
   possible to ascribe any effects specifically to the omega-3
   fatty acids. Examination of data from clinical studies
   revealed that the effects on blood lipids of fish oils
   containing omega-3 fatty acids were primarily a reduction of
   blood triglycerides, a blood lipid variable not considered to
   be an independent risk factor for CHD, but they had no effect
   on serum cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
   cholesterol, or high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol,
   the blood lipid variables most closely associated with risk of
   CHD. The scientific data are ambiguous on the effects of
   omega-3 fatty acids on blood pressure and other risk factors
   for CHD.
   
   (56 FR 60663.)
       A number of comments supported the agency's position on
   this health claim, but without any specific reasons for that
   support. One comment agreed with the agency's position in
   principle, but contested the agency's interpretation of the
   scientific information in some areas. Other comments disagreed
   with the agency's review of the scientific information and its
   conclusion regarding the strength of the evidence supporting
   the proposed health claim. Specific comments are summarized
   below.
   1. Epidemiologic evidence
       In the proposed rule, FDA reviewed correlational and
   cross-sectional studies, prospective studies, and intervention
   studies available since 1988. (See 56 FR 60663 at 60667
   through 60668). Except for the intervention studies (which
   were typically clinical trials) these studies used fish as a
   source of omega-3 fatty acids. FDA concluded that those
   studies that used fish as the source of omega-3 fatty acids
   were: ``ambiguous, because they are not capable of
   distinguishing the effects that are specificto omega-3 fatty
   acids from those that are related to fish consumption.'' (56
   FR 60663 at 60668.)
       16. A number of comments considered the evidence from
   epidemiologic studies that relates the consumption of fish
   inversely to CHD to be sufficient to support a health claim,
   but did not supply any new information or arguments to support
   their position.
       FDA disagrees with the comments. FDA found that:
   
       Only a few studies found an association between fish
   intake and CHD, while others have found no association. Thus
   there was not consistency of findings. None of the studies
   that reported a relationship distinguished fish consumption
   from other factors associated with fish consumption, and
   therefore they did not demonstrate specificity. Even in those
   studies reporting a relationship between fish consumption and
   CHD, it was not clear that the effects were because of the
   omega-3 fatty acids in fish. Also, the omega-3 fatty acid
   content of the fish diet associated with reduced CHD was so
   low that the importance of omega-3 fatty acids is questionable
   * * *
   
   (56 FR 60663 at 60672.)
       17. One comment described the results of the Dolecek and
   Grandits analysis of multiple risk factor intervention trial
   (MRFIT) data (Ref. 38) as indicating a greater protective
   effect against CHD due to consumption of 0.6 gram (g) omega-3
   fatty acidsthan all other conventional efforts combined
   (reducing saturated fat, cholesterol, cigarette smoking, and
   hypertension).
       FDA agrees with this comment that the association between
   omega-3 fatty acid consumption and CHD mortality reported in
   this study has the potential to make a very important public
   health impact. Notably, the results were obtained on data
   adjusted for age, race, smoking at entry to the study,
   diastolic blood pressure, and high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
   and LDL concentrations. Furthermore, the omega-3 fatty acids
   were obtained in the normal diet, providing evidence that the
   amount of omega-3 fatty acids consumed in a normal dietary
   intake is sufficient for the effect.
       The researchers' adjustments for lipoprotein measurements
   should control for some other dietary variables that have been
   associated with CHD through their effects on these
   lipoproteins, e.g., saturated fat, but other dietary variables
   associated with CHD were not controlled, e.g., alcohol. The
   association between omega-3 fatty acid consumption and CHD
   mortality described in this study is among the most
   provocative findings to date in this area, and merits
   additional study using a design that will document that the
   active dietary component is or is not the omega-3 fatty acids
   (i.e., specificity of the effect).
       18. One comment pointed out that the Burr paper (Ref. 16)
   deserved close consideration, because, in contrast to trials
   on lipid lowering drugs, it showed that consumption of fish
   containing omega-3 fatty acids or dietary supplements of
   omega-3 fattyacids may reduce the risk of heart disease. One
   comment stated that it considered the Burr paper to be a
   positive finding, but gave no reason for this conclusion. The
   LSRO final report, submitted as a comment, also recognized the
   Burr paper as a very important trial. LSRO pointed out that,
   although separate results were not shown for those consuming
   fatty fish and those consuming supplemental fish oil, the
   results were dramatic, especially since all-cause mortality
   was reduced, in contrast to results from trials of plasma
   lipid-lowering drugs. LSRO concluded that ``future research
   will be needed to define the amount and duration of w-3 fatty
   acid supplementation required to produce the beneficial
   effects.''
       FDA agrees that the Burr paper provides valuable evidence
   consistent with the hypothesized relationship between omega-3
   fatty acids and CHD. However, FDA noted in its proposal (56 FR
   60663 at 60668) that there are two specific shortcomings in
   this paper: the absence of separate data for subjects who
   consumed fish and those who consumed fish oil capsules, and
   the absence of dose-response data. These data would have
   provided evidence for a specific effect of omega-3 fatty
   acids. Ideally, other data regarding the subjects' diet would
   also show that there was no difference in consumption of other
   dietary factors related to CHD. The study design specifically
   included two such dietary factors, dietary fat and dietary
   fiber, and the lack of significant effects of these components
   argues against dietary factors other than omega-3 fatty acids
   as responsible for the association.
       FDA does not consider the Burr paper to have established a
   beneficial effect of omega-3 fatty acids, although its results
   are consistent with such an action. The LSRO conclusion
   indicates that neither the amount of omega-3 fatty acids
   necessary for beneficial effects nor the duration of their
   intake has been established. The specificity of the substance
   responsible for the beneficial effects, the quantitative
   amount needed to produce the effect and the duration of intake
   needed to produce the effect need to be established before FDA
   can authorize a claim linking omega-3 fatty acids to reduction
   of risk of CHD.
       19. Some comments stated that the amount of fish in the
   Zutphen and Burr studies was so low that the association
   between fish consumption and reduced CHD mortality could not
   be explained by the displacement by fish of other atherogenic
   foods from the diet.
       FDA is not persuaded by these comments. The limitation in
   these studies is that they did not control for dietary factors
   associated with CHD, not that fish consumption displaced other
   atherogenic foods. FDA noted in its proposal that the Zutphen
   study found significant correlations between fish consumption
   and other dietary factors (i.e., alcohol, polyunsaturated
   fats) related to CHD. Comparable correlations were not
   addressed in the Burr paper because dietary intake data were
   not reported. Also, the design of the Burr paper was to
   encourage consumption of fish, which would likely have
   resulted in a reduction in the consumption of red meat (and,
   therefore, saturated fat).
       20. Two comments discounted the Curb et al. study (Ref.
   25), which showed no association between fish consumption and
   CHD mortality among subjects in Hawaii. The comments stated
   that the dietary source of fish was likely tropical fish, and
   since tropical fish feed on coral they have a high content of
   AA, which would counteract the effect of omega-3 fatty acids.
       FDA disagrees with the comments. No data regarding the AA
   content of the diet in this study, or in other correlational
   studies, have been reported. Indeed, most epidemiologic
   correlation studies have not quantified the intakes of omega-3
   fatty acids, a fundamental measurement to establish an
   association between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD. Finally,
   there is an abstract reporting that the omega-3 fatty acid to
   omega-6 fatty acid ratio of tropical fish is comparable to or
   greater than that of fish inhigher latitudes (Ref. 237). Thus,
   the comments' explanation for a negative finding must be
   considered theoretical.
       21. One comment argued that the lack of an association
   between fish consumption and CHD in two populations in Canada,
   a prairie province and a coastal province (Ref. 74), was
   because the prairie population consumed more alcohol and the
   coastal population smoked more. This comment criticized FDA
   for not pointing out the cautions raised by the authors about
   potential confounders like the difference in alcohol
   consumption.
       FDA believes it presented the results of this paper
   fairly. While the authors reported small differences in
   smoking (more in the coastal population) and alcohol
   consumption (more in the prairie population), they stated,
   ``It seems unlikely that theseto offset any strong effect of
   fish consumption.'' FDA is keenly aware that dietary and
   behavioral factors (e.g., smoking, alcohol) must be controlled
   before meaningful conclusions may be drawn about the effects
   of omega-3 fatty acids. FDA notes that alcohol consumption was
   also a confounding factor in a study that reported an
   association between fish consumption and CHD (Ref. 87).
       22. A few comments stated that many of the reported
   effects come from studies on fish consumption, but that all
   measured biochemical changes related to CHD that are produced
   by fish have also been produced with fish oil concentrates.
       FDA agrees in part with this comment. The fact that the
   same biochemical results have been obtained using fish oils
   rather than fish provides strong evidence that particular
   biochemical markers are affected specifically by omega-3 fatty
   acids. Also,since most studies have used fish oils, these
   results add consistency to the effects reported for studies
   that used fish. However, FDA disagrees that the comparable
   findings in studies that used fish oils and fish are
   sufficient to support the health claim that omega-3 fatty
   acids reduce the risk of CHD, because the particular
   biochemical markers affected by both fish and fish oils are
   not recognized with significant scientific agreement as useful
   surrogate risk factors for CHD in the general population.
       23. One comment argued that the fact that Greenland
   Eskimos ate diets with half the saturated fat and more
   polyunsaturated fat than Danes and had much less CHD than
   Danes strengthens the case for fish oil-derived omega-3 fatty
   acids.
       FDA agrees with the comment that diets lower in saturated
   fat are consistent with reduced CHD mortality (see the final
   rule on ``Dietary Lipids and Coronary Vascular Disease''
   published elsewhere in this issue of the Federal Register).
   The differences in saturated fat intake, however, do not
   strengthen the case for omega-3 fatty acids, because they do
   not distinguish omega-3 fatty acids from polyunsaturated fats.
   Rather, the differences in dietary fat intakes strengthens the
   argument that saturated fat is associated with CHD mortality.
   The numerous dietary differences between the Greenland Eskimos
   and Danes make it difficult to ascribe to any single dietary
   factor the differences in CHD.
       24. One comment pointed out that, of the ten prospective
   studies cited in the proposal (including three in Table 1 of
   the proposal), six support an inverse relationship between
   fish consumption and CHD. The comment noted that one study
   only showed arelationship in men under 45, and argued that
   this result is promising because one might expect to find
   positive effects of long-term fish consumption on CHD in
   younger, relatively healthy men rather than in older men.
       FDA agrees that some but not all reports find an inverse
   relationship between fish consumption and CHD. FDA does not
   agree, however, that this effect would more likely be noticed
   among younger, relatively healthy men. Older men would have
   had a greater duration of intake of omega-3 fatty acids and a
   greater incidence of CHD than younger men. Both these factors
   would favor finding an effect in older men rather than in
   younger men.
       25. One comment noted that only two studies found a
   positive dose-response. Another comment stated that the
   studies that show no effect are those where the base group
   already consumed fish, whereas in studies that showed an
   effect, the base group did not consume fish. A third comment
   stated that there were data that described an inverse
   dose-response relationship between serum EPA and CHD deaths
   among Japanese, but did not identify a particular study.
       FDA disagrees that only two studies found a dose response
   correlation. Each study that reported a relationship between
   fish consumption (or, in one study, the calculated intake of
   omega-3 fatty acids) and CHD found a dose-response
   relationship. FDA agwho consume no fish at all and those who
   consume a small amount of fish, and that there appears to be
   little additional benefit from consumption of large amounts of
   fish (Ref. 88). An alternate way of describing these data is
   that those who consume no fish have an increased risk of CHD.
   These data merit followup, because a showing that the
   relationship is due to the omega-3 fatty acids may provide
   evidence that the long-chain omega-3 fatty acids are essential
   in the diet.
       In its proposal, FDA reviewed a study that described an
   inverse dose-response relationship between serum EPA and CHD
   mortality among two groups of Japanese (Ref. 78). FDA
   concluded that these cross-sectional, correlational data were
   useful in generating a hypothesis. Other notable dietary
   factors (including a difference in salt intake of 50 percent)
   and risk factors for CHD (prevalence of hypertension) also
   differed between the two groups, so it is not possible to
   conclude that differences in CHD mortality were due to
   differences in dietary omega-3 fatty acids.
       26. Two comments stated that FDA had erred in stating that
   no biochemical data were reported in the Burr paper (Ref. 16).
       FDA agrees with this comment, and stands corrected. Burr
   et al. (Ref. 16) did report that the geometric mean
   percentages of EPA were 0.59 percent and 0.46 percent in men
   given advice to consume more fish and those not so advised,
   respectively, a highly significant difference (p <0.01). The
   fact that a geometric mean rather than an arithmetic mean was
   reported implies that there was substantial skewing of the
   data.
       It is not clear from the article whether these differences
   were for the 6-month time into the trial, or for the end of
   the trial. The authors did not correlate plasma EPA
   concentrations directly with myocardial infarction (MI) or CHD
   deaths.
       27. One comment argued that it was highly misleading to
   state in Table 1 that Kromhout et al. (Ref. 87) reported that,
   ``lean fish, low in omega-3 fatty acids, had some protective
   effect against CHD,'' because Kromhout did not distinguish
   between the effects of lean and fatty fish.
       FDA disagrees with this comment. The authors made two
   statements about lean fish that imply that additional data
   analyses were conducted, although (as the comment correctly
   notes) results of these analyses were not included in the
   paper. The authorswrote, ``Lean fish was also inversely
   related to mortality from coronary heart disease,'' and
   ``Thus, the inverse relation between lean fish and coronary
   heart disease cannot be explained by eicosapentaenoic acid.''
       FDA interprets these comments as a caution to the reader
   against assuming that EPA was the active component responsible
   for the observed reduction in CHD among fish-consuming
   subjects.
       28. LSRO included in its report two studies that
   correlated plasma omega-3 fatty acids with dietary intake of
   these fatty acids (Refs. 213 and 225). Two other papers
   reviewed by LSRO but not included in the FDA proposal were
   correlation studies of mortality from different diseases among
   Greenlanders and Danes (Ref. 176) and diet-disease
   correlations in Japan (Ref. 284).
       FDA agrees with LSRO's descriptions of these studies. FDA
   notes that the authors of the studies that correlated intake
   and plasma levels of omega-3 fatty acids did not relate their
   data to CHD. The correlation studies of mortality did not
   provide any specific data regarding omega-3 fatty acids.
       29. One comment provided new dose-response data from
   additional analyses of data of the Dart study, previously
   reported in part by Burr et al. (Ref. 16), that related the
   dietary intake of EPA at 6 months into the trial to the risk
   of CHD events (heart attacks, or MI's) or CHD mortality. The
   947 subjects for whom dietary data were obtained were grouped
   according to EPA intake; 114 consumed less than 1 g per week
   (1 g/week), 373 consumed 1 to 2 g/week, and 460 consumed 2 or
   more g/week. The percentageietary EPA increased. For heart
   attacks the rates were 7.9 percent, 7.0 percent and 6.7
   percent, for the less than 1 g/week, 1 to 2 g/week and 2 or
   more g/week groups, respectively. The percentages in each
   group who died were 6.1 percent, 5.1 percent, and 4.1 percent,
   respectively. There were no statistical analyses of these data
   reported.
       FDA notes some limitations in these data as reported that
   caution against strong conclusions. Most notably, the analysis
   excluded the events and deaths during the first 6 months of
   the trial, when about half of all events and deaths occurred.
   This clearly diminishes the sensitivity of the analysis, and
   may result in an underestimation of the true effect, since the
   difference in survival between the group advised to eat more
   fish and the group not advised to eat more fish was most
   pronounced during the first 6 months. Alternatively, if the
   healthiest subjects were also the most compliant subjects, the
   reduced death rate in the highest EPA-consumption subjects may
   reflect the underlying health of those subjects, and the
   importance of dietary EPA maybe overestimated.
       Also, the unequal group sizes for this analysis places a
   greater weight on each subject in the smallest group (less
   than 1 g/week) than in the other groups. This may be
   particularly important because the smallest group includes
   those who consume no fish, and who may differ from fish
   consumers in other dietary or behavioral factors associated
   with CHD risk. The sensitivity of the results to small changes
   in outcomes is shown by example: one fewer death (6/114 rather
   than the reported number, 7/114) makes the CHD death rate of
   the less than 1 g/week group equal to the rate in the 1 to 2
   g/week group.
       Finally, although the dietary intake data at 6 months are
   useful, this study also assayed plasma fatty acids. Use of
   plasma EPA (or EPA plus DHA) in the dose-response analysis
   would have been a more powerful analysis, because it
   eliminates errors inthe diet record data, corrects for losses
   during food preparation and individual differences in
   bioavailability of the fatty acids, and integrates intake of
   omega-3 fatty acids over a longer period than the diet record
   data.
       Therefore, FDA finds these dose-response data to be
   consistent with the hypothesis that omega-3 fatty acids reduce
   the risk of CHD, but the shortcomings discussed above limit
   their usefulness in establishing a relationship between
   omega-3 fatty acids and risk of CHD.
   2. Evidence relating omega-3 fatty acids to intermediateor
   surrogate markers of CHD
       In the proposed rule (56 FR 60663 at 60668), FDA stated
   that most information about the effects of omega-3 fatty acids
   on CHD has been derived from clinical trials using
   concentrated fish oils enriched in EPA and DHA, and in some
   cases purified methyl or ethyl esters of EPA and DHA. FDA
   concluded that:
   
       * * * there are a few established effects of omega-3 fatty
   acids from fish oils on thrombosis and hemostasis.
   Standardized bleeding times are increased, and platelet
   aggregation and function are reduced. However, direct
   relationships between thechanges in bleeding times or platelet
   function and risk of CHD have not been established. While
   there is an established relationship between blood pressure
   and CHD, it has not been shown that omega-3 fatty acids
   specifically affect blood pressure in normal subjects in a way
   that would provide a protective benefit toward the risk of
   CHD. Effects of omega-3 fatty acids on other markers linked
   with CHD, e.g., fibrinogen or lipoprotein (a) have not been
   established.
   
   (56 FR 60663 at 60671).
   
   a. Atherosclerosis
   
   i. Blood lipids
   
       30. Numerous comments criticized FDA's focus on blood
   cholesterol as a surrogate marker for risk of CHD, although
   one comment noted that such an emphasis would be expected,
   given the importance of cholesterol in CHD. Another stated
   that the focus on c
       FDA disagrees with the comments that it overemphasized the
   importance of studies in which cholesterol was measured as a
   surrogate marker for CHD. The considerable attention given to
   blood cholesterol measurements (and measurements of other
   blood lipids and the protein components of blood lipoproteins)
   was the consequence of two factors: (1) There was a large
   number of studies on the effects of fish oils or fish
   containing omega-3 fatty acids on these blood lipid measures;
   and (2) there is general agreement that certain blood lipids
   are strongly associated with the risk of CHD.
       FDA undertook to evaluate findings in these studies
   whether or not fish or fish oils were used as the source of
   omega-3 fatty acids and whether or not the outcome measures
   were generally recognized as predictive of CHD. This approach
   allowed the identification of biologic activities of omega-3
   fatty acids that may be related at some point to risk of CHD,
   and identified areas where additional research is needed. FDA
   included in the summary of its proposed rule (56 FR 60663)
   only measures of generally recognized risk factors. FDA did
   not intend to imply that data on alternate markers were not
   considered in its decision.
       FDA agrees that other factors contribute to blood lipid
   measures, but believes that randomization should control for
   these factors. In nonrandomized studies, these sources of
   potential bias limit the conclusions that can be inferred from
   the data. This is an important reason that data from
   correlation studies do not conclusively establish a
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and risk of CHD.
       31. The LSRO report paid considerable attention to changes
   in blood lipids after increased consumption of omega-3 fatty
   acids, and reached some conclusions about effects of omega-3
   fatty acids on blood lipids that differed from those reached
   by FDA.LSRO abstracted three studies from before the period
   covered by FDA review (Refs. 284a, 267, and 257). These
   studies were considered in Federal Government and other
   comprehensive reports reviewed in the proposed rule and not
   discussed further by FDA. LSRO also included three studies not
   reviewed by FDA in its proposal (Refs. 168, 226, and 301).
   Agren et al. (Ref. 168) studied healthy students randomly
   assigned to their normal diet (one fish meal per 2 weeks), a
   fish diet, or a fish diet low in saturated fat for 15 weeks.
   There was no change in total serum cholesterol on the control
   diet or fish diet, but the low-fat fish diet produced a
   reduction in total cholesterol. Jensen et al. (Ref. 226)
   studied 18 healthy subjects supplemented sequentially for
   4-week periods with 4-week washouts between, with fish oils
   containing 1, 3, and 6 g EPA plus DHA, and found no change in
   total or LDL cholesterol. Wolmarans studied healthy subjects
   fed a meat diet or fish diet containing 6.1 g EPA plus DHA for
   6 weeks each in a crossover design, and found reduced total
   cholesterol and LDL cholesterol during the fish diet phase.
   There was no difference in total fat of the two diets.
   However, there was significantly less saturated fat in the
   fish diet, so it is not certain that the omega-3 fatty acids
   were responsible for the decrease in the cholesterol measures.
       FDA is concerned that the studies abstracted by LSRO do
   not accurately represent the totality of publicly available
   scientific evidence. For example, in its proposal, FDA
   included five studies among normal subjects (Refs. 2, 6, 24,
   73, and 143) and three studies among subjects with preexisting
   lipid or lipoprotein abnormalities (Refs. 18, 73, and 93) not
   included in the LSRO report that had data for effects of
   omega-3 fatty acids on plasma lipids or lipoproteins. FDA
   determined that seven studies that reported changes in total
   cholesterol had the most rigorous designs and the largest
   numbers of normal subjects. None of these seven studies (Refs.
   6, 9, 14, 49, 54, 73, and 166) in normal subjects found a
   significant change in total cholesterol after f
       Only two of these seven strongest studies in normal
   subjects were abstracted in the LSRO text, and two others were
   not cited at all by this report. LSRO did not distinguish
   between normal and hyperlipidemic subjects in its summary or
   conclusions. LSRO summarized the evidence on total cholesterol
   by stating, ``Decreases in total cholesterol * * * have also
   been reported,'' (emphasis added), without mentioning that the
   predominant finding is that there is no effect on total
   cholesterol.
       Similarly, FDA stated that the strongest studies among
   normal subjects (Refs. 6, 9, 14, 49, 54, 73, and 166) found no
   change in LDL cholesterol, and one reported an increase in LDL
   cholesterol (Ref. 54). Indeed, most studies on
   hypertriglyceridemic or hypercholesterolemic subjects reported
   an increase in LDL cholesterol following fish oil
   supplementation (56 FR 60663 at 60669). Consequently, FDA
   disagrees strongly with the summary statements in the LSRO
   report:
   
       Effects of fish oil upon LDL have been variable, in part
   because of different doses. In normolipidemic individuals, LDL
   has generally declined significantly. In some patients with
   primary hypercholesterolemia, consumption of fish (sic) hasnot
   resulted in altered plasma cholesterol levels; other studies
   have shown decreased cholesterol and LDL levels. (Emphasis
   added.)
   
       32. Two comments stated that FDA had not considered all
   relevant data on HDL2 cholesterol, and cited additional
   studies that reported increased HDL2 cholesterol after fish
   oil supplementation. One comment stated that overall HDL
   cholesterol tends to rise, and cited a review paper by Harris
   (Ref. 62). The LSRO report also concluded that HDL was
   increased by fish oil supplementation.
       FDA disagrees with the comment regarding the overall HDL
   cholesterol change after fish oil supplementation. The agency
   considered HDL changes separately for normal, healthy subjects
   and for hyperlipidemic subjects (56 FR 60663 at 60669). Nearly
   all studies on normal subjects found no significant change in
   HDL cholesterol level. Some investigators reported increased
   HDL2, but the data on HDL2 were equivocal.
       FDA also disagrees with the conclusions of the LSRO report
   regarding HDL cholesterol, because it does not represent the
   totality of publicly available scientific evidence. The LSRO
   summary states, ``In some studies HDL concentrations have
   actually increased with consumption of fish oil'' (emphasis
   added), not acknowledging that the balance of available
   scientific evidence on HDL indicates no change. In the review
   by Harris cited in the comment, the changes in HDL cholesterol
   in each study were weighted according to the number of
   subjects in the study, giving a per-subject change. This
   method of pooling data from different studies does not account
   for the variation of the response of subjects in each study,
   the amount of omega-3 fatty acids fed, the duration of
   feeding, or the source of the omega-3 fatty acids. Therefore,
   it must be considered only an estimate of the effects of
   omega-3 fatty acids on HDL cholesterol. Harris calculated the
   average HDL cholesterol change for normal subjects tobe an
   increase of approximately 3 percent, a net change smaller than
   the usual variability in the test used to measure HDL.
       The agency agrees with the comment that not all HDL2 data
   were considered in the proposed rule, although FDA noted (56
   FR 60663 at 60669) that some studies among normal subjects
   found increases in the HDL2 fraction of HDL cholesterol, and
   that these reports were the most promising changes in blood
   lipids. Of the six references cited by the comments as not
   included among studies showing increased HDL cholesterol after
   omega-3 fatty acids, two were published after the time period
   covered in the proposed rule (Refs. 235 and 252). One other
   paper not cited by FDA in its proposal, although it was
   published during 1988 (Ref. 291), dealt with insulin-dependent
   diabetics. The other three papers were cited by FDA in other
   contexts, but data fese papers regarding HDL2 cholesterol
   levels were not discussed (Refs. 1, 32, and 148).
       FDA reexamined those papers that it cited but from which
   it did not present data regarding HDL2, together with the
   newer papers. When fractions of HDL cholesterol have been
   reported, an increase has generally been found in the HDL2
   fraction (Refs. 1, 32, 148, 235, 251, and 291), with a
   comparable decrease in the HDL3 fraction (Refs. 1, 235, and
   251). This represents a shift within the HDL fractions toward
   a lipid-rich lipoprotein, and away from a protein-rich
   lipoprotein, similar to that reported for LDL, below. This
   shift has been reported when there is (Refs. 32, 148, 235, and
   291) or is not (Refs. 1 and 251) a change in total HDL
   cholesterol. This raises the possibility that a shift occurred
   in other studies where total HDL was reported as not changed.
       However, the importance of the shift in subfractions of
   HDL is not clear. FDA noted in its proposal (56 FR 60663 at
   60669) that there is evidence that the HDL2 fraction is the
   one most closely linked to risk of CHD. However, the agency
   was unable to find evidence that there was significant
   scientific agreement that HDL2 was the fraction of HDL most
   closely associated with CHD. The National Institutes of
   Health's National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
   consensus developmentconference on Triglyceride, High Density
   Lipoprotein and Coronary Heart Disease (Ref. 255), anticipated
   in the proposal (56 FR 60663 at 60664), concluded that, ``It
   is not known to what extent these alterations of HDL
   contribute to atherogenesis.''
       Therefore, data on changes in HDL subfractions after
   increased consumption of omega-3 fatty acids do not provide a
   sufficient basis for a health claim, because there is not
   significant scientific agreement that HDL2 is directly related
   to risk of CHD. If the risk of CHD becomes linked with HDL2,
   these findings in normal subjects may be of great importance.
       33. Many comments indicated that high triglycerides are
   causally related to decreased HDL, that triglycerides are an
   independent risk factor for CHD, or that statistical
   manipulations of data and imprecise measurements of
   triglycerides obscure the importance of triglycerides as a
   risk factor for CHD. One comment provided additional citations
   regarding the relationship between triglycerides and HDL, but
   these did not bear on risk of CHD. One comment stated that it
   was generally agreed that triglycerides were not independently
   associated with CHD.
       FDA disagrees with all but the last comment. FDA is aware
   that there has been, and still is, substantial interest in the
   potential role of triglycerides in the etiology of CHD (e.g.,
   Ref. 208). Because of the continued interest, the relationship
   between triglycerides and CHD was the topic of a consensus
   development conference sponsored by NHLBI on February 26
   through 28, 1992. NHLBI had previously addressed this topic in
   1983 and concluded at that time that the relationship was
   controversial. The recent conference (Ref. 255) concluded,
   ``For triglyceride, the data are mixed; although strong
   associations are found in some studies, the evidence on a
   causal relation is still incomplete.''
       FDA agrees that the statistical methods previously used to
   study the relationship between triglycerides and CHD have
   lessened the likelihood that triglycerides would be found to
   be a significant, independent predictor of CHD. Furthermore,
   the agencybelieves that study design and analytic measurement
   methods have contributed to variation in triglycerides that
   may have resulted in reducing the statistical association
   between triglycerides and CHD. FDA believes that these sources
   of variation in triglycerides can be reduced by careful study
   design and standardized analytical measurement techniques, and
   also that clinical studies designed to lower triglycerides
   could provide a basis upon which to reconsider the importance
   of triglycerides in CHD.
       34. Some comments stated that some very recent evidence
   from the Helsinki Heart Study supports a protective effect of
   lowering triglycerides, at least for a selected subpopulation
   of people with a high ratio of LDL cholesterol/HDL cholesterol
   and very high triglycerides.
       FDA agrees that fish oils reduce plasma triglycerides. In
   its proposal FDA wrote, ``The predominant blood lipid effects
   of fish oils * * * are decreased plasma triglycerides and
   VLDL.'' (56 FR 60663 at 60669.) In this regard FDA and LSRO
   were in agreement. The LSRO summary states, ``The most
   striking effect is lowering of plasma triglyceride and VLDL
   concentrations.''
       FDA disagrees, however, that triglycerides have been
   established as an independent risk factor for CHD. The recent
   results from the Helsinki Heart Study (Ref. 242) were
   discussed at length at the NHLBI consensus development
   conference (Ref. 255). While the reduction in CHD mortality
   following drug intervention was dramatic (i.e., approximately
   7-fold) for a particular subgroup with both elevated
   triglycerides and elevated LDL to HDL ratio, this result was
   obtained by a post hoc analysis of earlier results. Because
   the combination of factors used to connote the high-risk group
   (i.e., high LDL cholesterol to HDL cholesterol ratio and high
   triglycerides) was determined after the data were collected,
   these results are not the results of the testing of a
   hypothesis, but are the origins of a new hypothesis. The
   authors indicate that the cut-off points for the ratio of LDL
   to HDL and triglycerides chosen were to some extent arbitrary.
   The actual number of cardiac events in the study was small
   (e.g., 18 events among 138 subjects in the highest risk
   subgroup), and the reduction in all-cause mortality due to the
   lipid-lowering drug, gemfibrozil, was not significant.
   Finally, independent of LDL to HDL ratio, increased
   triglycerides alone were not associated with an increased risk
   of heart attack.
       The dramatic reduction of triglycerides by omega-3 fatty
   acids has resulted in their use in the treatment of a rare
   genetic hypertriglyceridemia (type V) to prevent
   noncardiovascular effects of high triglycerides (i.e.,
   pancreatitis), but the usefulness of lowering triglycerides as
   a general strategy in prevention of CHD is not generally
   agreed. Therefore, FDA believes that the triglyceride-lowering
   effect of fish oils for some at-risk persons does not provide
   a basis for a health claim at this time.
       35. Numerous comments indicated that postprandial
   triglyceridemia is a mechanism of action in the development of
   atherosclerosis. Some comments indicated that the relationship
   of elevated triglycerides to risk of CHD would be discussed at
   the NHLBI consensus development conference (Ref. 255). Others
   pointed out that LSRO had concluded that elevated very low
   density lipoproteins (VLDL) and triglycerides were
   atherogenic. LSRO stated that the reduction of postprandial
   hyperlipidemia is a ``most important anti-atherogenic
   action.'' LSRO wrote in the summary that, ``Since postprandial
   lipemia has been identified as an atherogenic risk factor, its
   prevention by w-3 fatty acids would be a most desirable
   effect'' (emphasis added), and in its conclusions LSRO wrote:
   
       Fish oil has a generally accepted hypolipidemic effect
   without depressing HDL. This applies most to VLDL and
   triglyceride, lipids now believed to be atherogenic. There is
   little doubt that there is a reduction of postprandial
   hyperlipidemia following the ingestion of dietary fat if the
   background diet contains relatively small quantities of w-3
   fatty acids. This may be a most important anti-atherogenic
   action.
   
       FDA agrees that fish oils do not generally lower HDL. FDA
   also agrees that major blood lipid effects of omega-3 fatty
   acids are reductions of triglyceride and VLDL. The role of
   omega-3 fatty acids in the reduction of postprandial
   triglycerides waspaper used only 5 g of fish oil, containing
   1.7 g EPA plus DHA. These studies showed that the
   concentration of plasma chylomicrons after a high-fat test
   meal was significantly less if the subjects had been consuming
   a fish oil diet than if they had beenconsuming a saturated fat
   or olive oil supplemented diet. Thus, FDA agrees that fish
   oils reduce postprandial lipemia.
       However, FDA disagrees that there is significant
   scientific agreement that VLDL and triglycerides are
   atherogenic, or that the reduction in postprandial
   hyperlipemia is a most important anti-atherogenic action.
   Neither the Federal Government nor other authoritative reports
   have included these blood lipid measures among those they
   consider to be independent risk factors associated with CHD
   (Refs. 34 through 36, and 115). Furthermore, postprandial
   lipemia was discussed at the February 1992 NHLBI consensus
   development conference. The summary of that conference stated,
   ``Postprandial triglyceride may be more important than the
   fasting triglyceride levels [to CHD], but little is known
   about this at the present time.'' (Ref. 255).
       FDA notes that the only paper in the LSRO report cited in
   support of this hypothesized mechanism of action of omega-3
   fatty acids in the prevention of CHD was a review paper
   published in 1979 (Ref. 305). Therefore, FDA believes that
   there is not significant scientific agreement at this time
   that postprandial triglycerides are related to the risk of
   CHD.
   
   ii. Vessel wall effects
   
       36. One comment indicated that two new studies support the
   use of omega-3 fatty acids to prevent restenosis, the closing
   of a mechanically opened blood vessel (Refs. 172 and 259).
   This comment suggested that FDA discounted the findings of the
   Dehmerstudy (Ref. 30) on the basis that it employed
   simultaneous treatment with drugs and fish oils.
       FDA considered the use of omega-3 fatty acids to prevent
   restenosis to be a drug usage (56 FR 60663 at 60670), and
   notes that patients in these studies are under a physician's
   care. FDA's description of the Dehmer study points out a
   limitation of the data that is common in other reports of no
   effect of omega-3 fatty acids in restenosis (Refs. 56, 106,
   and 121), that the studies have not controlled for generalized
   effects of PUFA's that are not specific to omega-3 fatty
   acids. A better balanced experimental design would be
   comparison of drugs plus omega-3 fatty acids to drugs plus
   alternate PUFA's (e.g., corn oil).
       FDA agrees that the new studies provide some support for
   the role of omega-3 fatty acids in prevention of restenosis,
   although neither was designed to distinguish effects of
   omega-3 fatty acids from effects of omega-6 PUFA's.
       Nye et al. (Ref. 259) studied 79 men and 29 women who were
   referred for angina and underwent coronary percutaneous
   transluminal angioplasty (PCTA), i.e., a mechanical opening of
   a closed heart blood vessel. The subjects were randomly
   assigned to oneof three treatments: (1) A combination of
   aspirin plus dipyridamole (an anti-platelet combination of
   drugs), (2) olive oil placebo, or (3) 12 milliliters (mL) fish
   oil containing 3.2 g EPA plus DHA/day. Subjects were restudied
   1 year later or before if symptoms recurred, and 93 percent of
   all subjects were followed for the year. Although there was no
   significant difference in angina among the groups, the rate of
   restenosis, defined in this study as a loss of 50 percent or
   more of the luminal diameter increased by PCTA, was
   significantly less in the fish oil group (11 percent) than in
   the placebo group (30 percent).
       The use of olive oil as the placebo did not control for
   effects due to PUFA's (omega-6). Also, it is notable that the
   restenosis rate in the aspirin group was somewhat higher (17
   percent) than in the fish oil group, because aspirin is a much
   more pote
       The full ``Quebec study'' was published after the receipt
   of the comment, but because it was cited in the comment it
   will be discussed here. In this study, Bairati et al. (Ref.
   172) conducted a double-blind, randomized intervention with
   either fish oil containing 4.5 g EPA plus DHA/day, or olive
   oil placebo in 205 patients undergoing first PCTA. The
   treatments were started 3 weeks before the procedure, and
   continued for 6 months after. Restenosis was assessed
   angiographically, using a quantitative computer analysis
   program. Restenosis was reduced in the fish oil group compared
   to the olive oil group according to 3 of 4 definitions of
   restenosis. It was not reduced according to the clinical
   definition used by Nye et al. (Ref. 259), above, of a lossof
   50 percent or more of the luminal diameter increased by PCTA.
       This study also collected dietary data. The third of the
   subjects with the highest consumption of omega-3 fatty acids
   (0.15 g/day) and the third of the subjects with intermediate
   consumption of omega-3 fatty acids (0.033 to 0.15 g/day) had
   significantly lower rates of restenosis than the third
   consuming the least amount of omega-3 fatty acids. In fact,
   dietary omega-3 fatty acids (other than the supplement) were
   associated with a greater reduction in chance of restenosis
   than was the supplement. This result was somewhat surprising,
   since the supplement contained 30 times the amount of omega-3
   fatty acids in the diet. No differences in rate of restenosis
   were found according to intake of total fat, polyunsaturated
   fat, monounsaturated fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, or total
   seafood consumption. These results suggest that chronic
   consumption of low amounts of omega-3 fatty acids may be as
   useful in preventing restenosis as much larger amounts
   consumed for a few weeks prior to and after PCTA.
       In general, the results of Bairati et al. (Ref. 172) and
   Nye et al. (Ref. 259) are consistent, even though they
   obtained different results according to one identical
   definition of restenosis. The Bairati et al. study, like Nye
   et al. 1990, used olive oil as the control. If the mechanism
   of action of omega-3 fatty acids in restenosis is through
   competition with AA, this control is suitable, and an omega-6
   fatty acid oil would have made the difference due to omega-3
   fatty acids even more pronounced. If, however, the mechanism
   of action is through nonspecific effects of highly unsaturated
   fatty acids, then a control of a PUFA (e.g., corn oil) might
   have reduced the apparent effect of omega-3 fatty acids. It is
   notable that the only study of restenosis that has used a
   polyunsaturated fat control (an olive oil-corn oil mix) did
   not find an effect (Ref. 56).
       37. Five studies in humans relevant to the actions of
   omega-3 fatty acids on the vessel wall were referenced in
   comments (Refs. 200, 213, 259, 268, and 277), including two
   published since the time period covered by FDA's review in its
   proposed rule (Refs. 200 and 268). Hamakazi et al. (Ref. 213)
   found a slower aortic pulse wave velocity (an
   electro-physiologic measurement) in persons from a Japanese
   fishing village compared to those from a farming village.
   Other data showed the populations differedin their intake of
   omega-3 fatty acids. Rapp et al. (Ref. 268) measured the
   amount of omega-3 fatty acids in the atherosclerotic lesion
   after consumption of omega-3 fatty acids at a high level (6
   percent of calories, 16 to 21 g EPA plus DHA/day) for 6 to 120
   days prior to planned surgical intervention, and found that
   the amount of omega-3 fatty acids in the lesion continued to
   increase throughout the time of ingestion. Force et al. (Ref.
   200) studied the effects of fish oils and aspirin on the
   production of urinary metabolites of AA and EPA. Fish oil
   feeding resulted in a slight decrease in the amount of
   thromboxane A2 made in the platelet, a decrease in the amount
   of AA-derived prostacyclin made in the endothelial cell, and
   an increase in the atudy is discussed in comment 36 of this
   document.
       FDA considers these studies to be observational, not
   clearly associating omega-3 fatty acids with risk of CHD. The
   correlation data of Hamakazi et al. do not indicate a specific
   role for omega-3 fatty acids. The Rapp et al. data verify that
   it is possible to incorporate omega-3 fatty acids into
   preexisting atherosclerotic plaque, but the relevance of
   incorporated omega-3 fatty acids has not been established. The
   studies of Force et al. and Schmidt et al. relate to a
   potential mechanism of action ofomega-3 fatty acids, but the
   importance of these actions in reducing risk of CHD has not
   been established.
       38. Many comments stated that the biochemical and
   physiological actions of omega-3 fatty acids are
   anti-atherogenic because they favor vasodilatation and inhibit
   vasoconstriction. One comment by a manufacturer of omega-3
   fatty acids considered theseactions have potential for future
   significance. Two comments cited a list of effects of omega-3
   fatty acids, suggesting that each of the effects in the list
   was anti-atherogenic, and other comments referred to one or
   more of the components in the list. The listed changes were:
   decreased thromboxane;
   increased prostacyclin and leukotriene (LTB4);
   decreased fibrinogen;
   decreased platelet activating factor (PAF);
   decreased platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF);
   decreased superoxide;
   decreased interleukin-1 (TNF);
   increased endothelium-derived relaxation factor (EDRF);
   decreased lipoprotein (a) (Lp(a));
   reduced inflammatory response; and
   increased fibrinolytic activity.
       The LSRO report stated that other mechanisms, such as
   cellular growth factors, interleukin-1 and cytokins, and EDRF
   may be important in the development of atherosclerosis, and be
   affected by omega-3 fatty acids. However, except for a single
   in vitrostudy on PDGF, no data are described in the report
   regarding these factors, nor is their relevance to human CHD
   discussed.
       FDA addresses fibrinogen, Lp(a), and fibrinolytic activity
   in comment 46 and in section II.C.2. of this document. FDA
   does not agree that omega-3 fatty acids produce changes in all
   of the listed parameters. FDA has determined that for some of
   these endpoints the changes have not been shown to be specific
   to omega-3 fatty acids, but may be due to polyunsaturated fats
   instead. FDA disagrees that the changes brought about by
   omega-3 fatty acids will prevent atherosclerosis. Most of the
   data regarding changes in these endpoints brought about by
   omega-3 fatty acids have been derived from tissue culture or
   animal experiments, and the relevance to human atherosclerosis
   has not been demonstrated.
       Thromboxanes and prostacyclins are compounds derived from
   omega-3 fatty acids and omega-6 fatty acids that affect the
   relaxed state of the blood vessels. Thromboxanes are produced
   primarily in platelets, and prostacyclins are produced
   primarily in the endothelial cells of the blood vessels. The
   thromboxane made from an omega-6 fatty acid called AA,
   thromboxane A2, is a potent vasoconstrictor. EPA competes with
   AA for the enzyme that makes thromboxane A2, and thereby
   diminishes the rate of production of thromboxane A2; the
   thromboxane made from EPA is a much less potent
   vasoconstrictor. The prostacyclins made from AA or EPA in the
   endothelial cells are vasodilators. Thus, the relative amounts
   of AA and EPA in platelets and endothelial cells play a role
   in determining the form and amounts of the prostaglandins and
   thromboxanes that affect the tension of the vessel wall.
   Excessive constriction may lead to an occlusion, resulting in
   a heart attack. While there is general recognition that these
   vasoactive compounds may play a role in the formation of clots
   and thereby in heart attacks, there is no agreement about the
   extent of changes needed in the concentrations of the
   vasoactive compounds in order to have an effect on heart
   diconsumption of fish oil, are only useful as marker for CHD
   only insofar as there is significant scientific agreement that
   the magnitude of the changes is related to CHD. FDA is not
   aware of any such agreement, nor did the comments provide any
   evidence of agreement that particular changes in the levels of
   these vasoactive compounds were related to a reduction in risk
   of disease. Furthermore, the amount of omega-3 fatty acids
   needed to produce these changes in humans is not known.
       For PDGF the evidence is confined to animal studies (Ref.
   201), and the relevance to human disease has only been
   suggested, not demonstrated. The animal studies on PDGF also
   did not show that the effect was specific to omega-3 fatty
   acids. For example, the PDGF effect was observed also after
   polyunsaturated fats, and was abolished by anti-oxidants,
   suggesting that any highly unsaturated fatty acids prone to
   oxidation would have the effect. The experiments on EDRF (Ref.
   181) also did not show that the effects were specific to
   omega-3 fatty acids, since the experiments were carried out in
   the presence of indomethacin, which blocks the eicosanoid
   effects of EPA. In fact, the authors consider changes in
   membrane fluidity to be a reasonable explanationfor the
   effects. In yet other cases, e.g., TNF, there are conflicting
   results depending on the species (Refs. 41 and 236), and the
   findings must be considered preliminary.
       FDA considered the effect of omega-3 fatty acids on
   chemotaxis, one aspect of inflammatory response (56 FR 60663
   at 60670). A complete discussion of the role of fish oils in
   inhibition of the inflammatory process is outside of the scope
   of this rulemaking, but the relationship between omega-3 fatty
   acids and inflammatory response could be the subject of a
   petition for a health claim that includes the necessary
   information about this relationship.
       FDA agrees that the biochemistry of the products formed
   from the omega-3 fatty acids in vivo (i.e., eicosanoids) have
   been shown under experimental conditions, usually in vitro, to
   have pronounced effects on the vessel wall. However,
   demonstration of isolated biochemical effects is not a
   sufficient basis upon which to make a claim regarding the
   outcome of a multifactorial process. Intermediate markers of
   CHD are useful only insofar as there is significant scientific
   agreement that changes in these markers produced by omega-3
   fatty acids are causally related to CHD.
   
   b. Thrombosis and hemostasis
   
       39. A few comments stated that the mode of action of
   omega-3 fatty acids may be through stabilization of
   arrhythmia, and noted the reduced rate of death after heart
   attacks (MI's) in the Dart study (Ref. 16). This comment also
   stated that certain animal data were consistent with this
   hypothesis. The comments stated that the fibrillation
   mechanism suggested by DART was compelling, because 60 percent
   of sudden deaths are caused by ventricular fibrillation
   following reperfusion. Many commented that data from nonhuman
   primate models show that omega-3 fatty acids abolish
   arrhythmias, whereas polyunsaturated fat (safflower oil) had a
   lesser effect.
       FDA disagrees with these comments. FDA's review of the
   literature regarding the usefulness of omega-3 fatty acids in
   arrhythmia and ventricular fibrillation found only one study
   on arrhythmias in humans, and it reported no significant
   effect of omega-3 fatty acids (Ref. 58). A review in 1989 also
   concluded that, even among the animal studies, there was no
   significant difference between omega-3 fatty acids and other
   polyunsaturated fats on arrhythmias (Ref. 269).
       The data from the studies in nonhuman primates (i.e., the
   marmoset monkey) were published only as a nonpeer-reviewed
   paper in a book (Ref. 188). Two papers by the same author on
   the same topic were cited in 1990 as in press in a
   peer-reviewed journal,lement of DHA-rich fish oil at a level
   of 8 percent of the diet by weight. FDA calculates that this
   would provide 2.5 g of omega-3 fatty acids from fish
   oil/kilogram (kg), over 50 times the usual rate of
   supplementation in human studies (10 g fish oil or 3 g omega-3
   fatty acids/day for a 70 kg subject), and over 300 times the
   amount of omega-3 fatty acids associated with reduced risk of
   CHD in the epidemiologic literature (Refs. 16, 38, and 87
   report 300 to 660 milligrams (mg)/day). Thus, the relevanceof
   these studies to omega-3 fatty acids in the human diet is
   questionable.
       FDA is aware of in vitro data that show a specific
   protective effect of EPA against toxicity of heart muscle
   cells in culture. These results provide a biochemical basis
   for the hypothesized stabilization of cardiac arrhythmias by
   omega-3 fatty acids. Although this study (Ref. 212) was
   performed in vitro on heart cells from rats, it showed that
   the protective effect was specific to omega-3 fatty acids
   (EPA) because a similar effect was not obtained when a highly
   unsaturated omega-6 fatty acid (AA) was used instead.
       FDA also regards the evidence from the Burr study of
   reduced death following a heart attack among those men advised
   to increase fish consumption as consistent with a
   stabilization of arrhythmias (Ref. 16). FDA agrees that this
   postulated mechanism of action is of great potential public
   health significance. However, the agency finds the clinical
   data available at this time are not in agreement with animal
   and in vitro data. Because the clinical data are not in
   agreement with these other types of data and because of the
   limitations in the animal studies, FDA concludes that there is
   not sufficient basis for protective effect specific to omega-3
   fatty acids on arrhythmias, and, therefore, CHD in humans.
       40. One comment criticized the 6-week clinical study by
   Hardarson et al. that found no effect of omega-3 fatty acids
   on arrhythmias (Ref. 58), arguing that the time for
   incorporation of omega-3 fatty acids into heart phospholipids
   was too short for an effect to be observed.
       FDA agrees in part and disagrees in part with this
   comment. Generally, the time needed for incorporation of
   omega-3 fatty acids into cellular phospholipids is short;
   studies in animals show such incorporation in a period of
   weeks (Ref. 249). In the Hardarson study (Ref. 58), a
   substantial amount of cod liver oil was fed (20 mL/day) and a
   230 percent increase in plasma phospholipid EPA was found.
   There was no trend toward reduced arrhythmias. Other data,
   however, show that although plasma phospholipids increase the
   omega-3 fatty acid content during the first few weeks of
   supplementation, the incorporation of omega-3 fatty acids in
   human atherosclerotic plaque continues to increase through 120
   days (Ref. 268). Therefore, FDA agrees with the comment the
   supplementation period in the Hardarson study (Ref. 58) may
   have been too short to find an effect of fish oils on
   occurrence of arrhythmias. Also, the agency notes that the
   absence of a difference in CHD mortality during the first 6
   weeks of the Burrstudy (Ref. 16) is consistent with the
   hypothesis that prolonged intake of omega-3 fatty acids
   (longer than 6 weeks) is needed to observe an effect on
   arrhythmias or other mechanisms that reduce CHD mortality. FDA
   agrees that effects of long-term consumption of omega-3 fatty
   acids on arrhythmias, other platelet or vessel wall functions,
   and even some blood lipid measures have not been sufficiently
   studied.
   
   i. Bleeding times
   
       41. Two comments stated that there is no evidence of
   increased bleeding even among patients who had ingested 6 to 8
   g of EPA plus DHA/day and underwent emergency surgery,
   coronary artery bypass surgery or angioplasty. The comments
   argued that increased bleeding has not a safety concern.
       FDA agrees that there are few reports of excessive
   bleeding after ingestion of omega-3 fatty acids. However, FDA
   notes that the cited reports are for subjects with CHD, and
   evidence of the lack of excessive bleeding complications in
   this population is not sufficient to assure safety of omega-3
   fatty acids in the general population. FDA believes that
   changes in bleeding due to consumption of omega-3 fatty acids
   remains a valid safety concern (see comment 52 of this
   document).
   
   ii. Platelet aggregation
   
       In the proposal, FDA stated:
   
       The relationship between platelet aggregation and the risk
   of heart attacks or CHD death in the general population is an
   important line of evidence that would support drug claims and
   perhaps health claims for omega-3 fatty acids. Although there
   is some evidence that changes in platelet aggregation may help
   prevent second heart attacks * * * it has not been shown that
   changes in platelet aggregation in the general population will
   reduce the risk of CHD.
   
   (56 FR 60663 at 60670.)
   The agency added: ``What has not been established, however, is
   that platelet aggregation is a bona fide surrogate risk factor
   for CHD in the general population.'' (56 FR 60663 at 60672.)
       42. Many comments argued that platelet aggregation is
   completely substantiated as a marker for risk of CHD, based on
   the results of the Physicians' Health Study (Ref. 66). One
   comment qualified this conclusion stating that the primary
   effect of omega-3 fatty acids in vivo was to reduce platelet
   deposition at sites of aortic lesions.
       FDA acknowledges that aspirin studies provide evidence
   that platelet aggregation is a risk factor for CHD. The effect
   of aspirin in inhibiting platelet function has been shown.
   Among persons who have already had an MI, aspirin is effective
   in preventing a second infarction. FDA has proposed that
   aspirin be used to reduce the risk of death and/or nonfatal
   heart attack in patients with previous infarction or unstable
   angina pectoris as a professional labeling indication
   (provided to health professionals, but not to the general
   public), in the tentative final monograph for over-the-counter
   internal analgesic, antipyretic, and antirheumatic drug
   products (November 16, 1988, 53 FR 46204 at 46259). However,
   FDA does not consider the effects of aspirin in the
   Physicians' Health Study sufficient to establish that dietary
   omega-3 fatty acids would have the same effect in the general
   population. The Physicians' Health Study did not evaluate
   omega-3 fatty acids. The study population was highly selected;
   therate of heart attacks was approximately 10-fold lower than
   in the general population, and cardiovascular mortality was
   only 15 percent of that expected for the general population of
   white men of the same age. Also, the results of the
   Physician's Health Study are not as straightforward as
   presented in the comments. The chairman of the Physicians'
   Health Study reported that there was a reduced risk of MI in
   the aspirin group, predominantly in nonfatal MI, but that
   there was no significant effect on overall cardiovascular
   mortality (a 2 percent reduction, not statistically
   significant) (Ref. 66). In addition, the aspirin group in this
   study had a greater number of sudden deaths (Ref. 282).
       In the other primary prevention trial (Ref. 265), aspirin
   did not have any significant effect on heart attacks, on
   stroke, or on total vascular mortality. There was a
   significant increase in disabling stroke in the group taking
   aspirin.
       On the basis of these studies there has not been an
   endorsement of the use of aspirin as a prophylactic measure
   against CHD by the general population by the American Heart
   Association or by the Canadian Medical Association (Ref. 187).
   Notably, ``1992 Heart and Stroke Facts'' published by the
   American Heart Association (Ref. 169) makes no reference to
   platelet aggregation as a risk factor for heart attacks
   (although sticky platelets are mentioned to be a consequence
   of cigarette smoking in the section on stroke), nor is aspirin
   discussed as an option for CHD prophylaxis, even though other
   drug and surgical treatments are discussed.
       Therefore, FDA concludes that there is not significant
   scientific agreement at this time that platelet aggregation is
   a surrogate marker for CHD in the general population.
       43. The LSRO report, submitted as a comment, contained
   abstracts of 19 studies in humans that contained data
   regarding changes in platelet function following omega-3 fatty
   acid consumption. LSRO concluded that omega-3 fatty acids
   prevented platelet aggregation.
       In its proposal, FDA stated: ``Platelet aggregation is
   generally considered to be decreased by fish oil
   consumption.'' (56 FR 60663 at 60670.) The agency also stated:
   ``* * * platelet aggregation and function are reduced.
   However, direct relationships between the changes in * * *
   platelet function and risk or CHD have not been established.''
   (56 FR 60633 at 60671.) Thus, FDA agrees with the conclusions
   of LSRO about effects of omega-3 fatty acids on platelet
   aggregation.
       Two of the studies described by LSRO were not considered
   by FDA in its review, because they were published before 1988,
   and had been considered by Federal Government and other
   authoritative reports. One study (Ref. 227) used a large
   amount of fish oil (50 mL/day) not reasonably related to
   normal dietary intake. The other study (Ref. 211) involved 13
   insulin-dependent diabetics, and therefore is of questionable
   relevance for the general population.
       In its proposed rule, FDA considered 13 of the other 17
   studies that were abstracted by LSRO. One of the four studies
   not addressed by FDA was a study on the effects of added
   vitamin E to fish oil on fibrinogen and fibrinolysis (Ref.
   210). Two papers (Refs. 234 and 244) were published after the
   time period covered by FDA review. Marckmann et al. (Ref. 244)
   compared the effects of a fish diet and a lean meat diet on
   plasminogen activator (t-PA), plasminogen activator inhibitor
   (PAI - 1) and the activity of the inhibitor (PAI - 1
   activity). Li and Steiner (Ref. 234) described changes in in
   vitro platelet adhesion after fish oil supplementation. The
   fourth paper was an uncontrolled observation study that found
   a high frequency of nosebleeds in adolescents supplemented
   with fish oils (Ref. 189).
       Six other papers on thrombosis were not described in the
   LSRO text, but were included in the table (Refs. 203, 204,
   209, 226, 245, and 254). Of these six, one was not relevant to
   the nutrient-disease relationship (Ref. 245) because it did
   not study EPA and DHA. Jensen et al. (Ref. 226) found no
   significant change in bleeding times in normal subjects after
   1, 3, or 6 g EPA plus DHA/day in healthy subjects. Green et
   al. (Ref. 209) found no change in platelet aggregation or
   platelet count in 27 hyperlipidemic subjects in a randomized
   double-blind placebo controlled crossover trial. The
   treatments were 15 g/day fish oil containing 4.3 g EPA plus
   DHA and a 50:50 mix of corn:olive oil, with each treatment
   lasting 8 weeks, and a 4-week washout between. Blood viscosity
   was decreased by fish oil. Gazso et al. (Ref. 204) found
   decreased platelet aggregation in healthy subjects after
   consumption of EFAmol-marine compared to olive oil in a
   double-blind randomized crossover study. These results of
   studies confirm others cited by FDA. The other studies (Refs.
   203 and 254) pertained to regulators of bleeding and are
   discussed below.
       Eight papers on platelet function were reviewed by FDA but
   not by LSRO (Refs. 2, 6, 18, 24, 73, 93, 131, and 143). Three
   studies were uncontrolled (Refs. 18, 93, and 143), while two
   were randomized (Refs. 2 and 131). Three were randomized,
   double-blind, placebo-controlled trials that used saturated
   vegetable oil (Ref. 6), vitamin E (Ref. 24) or wheat germ oil
   (Ref. 73) as the placebos. The two studies that used vegetable
   oil or vitamin E as controls found a reduction in platelet
   aggregation after omega-3 fatty acids, where no difference was
   reported in the trial that used a wheat germ oil placebo,
   although the data were not provided in this paper.
       FDA and LSRO reached the same conclusions with regard to
   the effects of omega-3 fatty acids on platelet function. LSRO
   also concluded that platelet survival is also enhanced, but
   the only two studies published since 1987 that reported
   increased platelet survival (Refs. 94 and 144) were both
   uncontrolled, so the effect cannot be attributed specifically
   to omega-3 fatty acids.
       44. One comment agreed in principle with the agency's
   assessment of the effects of omega-3 fatty acids on bleeding
   times, platelet aggregation, regulators of bleeding and blood
   pressure. The comment pointed out the extent of inhibition of
   platelet adhesion is as much as 60 percent, a marked reduction
   in adhesion.
       FDA agrees that the reported extent of reduction of
   platelet adhesion from omega-3 fatty acid intake is remarkable
   (Ref. 234). The agency notes that this effect appears specific
   to omega-3 fatty acids at reasonable intake levels. FDA notes
   that animal studies (Refs. 230 through 233) published since
   the proposed rule provide evidence of reduced platelet
   adhesion to blood vessel endothelium in vivo in response to
   agents that provoke such adhesion. Because of the magnitude of
   the effect of omega-3 fatty acids on platelet adhesion, FDA
   considers this action of omega-3 fatty acids on blood platelet
   function to have great potential with regard to the
   development of atherosclerosis and the risk of CHD. However,
   as for platelet aggregation, FDA does not believe that there
   currently is significant scientific agreement that platelet
   adhesion is an accepted risk factor for CHD in the general
   population.
   
   iii. Regulators of bleeding
   
       In its proposal (56 FR 60663 at 60670 through 60671), FDA
   reviewed data on the effects of omega-3 fatty acids on other
   factors that are involved in the regulation of
   bleeding--fibrinogen, fibrinolytic activity and Lp(a)--and
   that have been associated with CHD.
       45. Some comments, including the LSRO report, stated that
   omega-3 fatty acids increase fibrinolysis.
       FDA disagrees with these comments. FDA found that there
   was no clear relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and
   factors involved in dissolving blood clots (56 FR 60663 at
   60671). FDA noted that the data did not establish that omega-3
   fatty acids reduced fibrinogen, because most studies did not
   control for other factors that might have reduced fibrinogen,
   e.g., other PUFA's.
       FDA has reviewed the relevant studies again, as well as
   studies brought to its attention in the LSRO report. LSRO
   cited three papers on fibrinogen or fibrinolysis not cited by
   FDA. One placebo (vitamin E) controlled study found no change
   in fibrinolytic activity (Ref. 210). Mullertz et al. (Ref.
   254) supplemented seven healthy adults with 0.55 g EPA plus
   DHA/day for 21 days and found increased levels of PAI - 1, but
   no change in t-PA, suggesting that fish oil decreased
   fibrinolytic capability. Ganset al. (Ref. 203) reported no
   change in fibrinogen concentration after EFAmol-marine
   compared to corn oil, which is rich in polyunsaturated fat.
   These studies do not support the conclusion that omega-3 fatty
   acids reduce fibrinogen, or increase fibrinolysis.
       The selection of studies abstracted by LSRO may not have
   represented the publicly available scientific evidence. For
   example, five papers abstracted found either a decrease in
   fibrinogen or an increase in fibrinolytic activity (Refs. 57,
   71, 98, 104, and 117). In contrast, two studies found no
   change in fibrinolytic activity (Refs. 150 and 166), and only
   one found increased fibrinogen (Ref. 144), leaving the
   impression that omega-3 fatty acids usually have been reported
   to enhance fibrinolysis.
       However, three other studies not abstracted by LSRO but
   included in their tables reported no effect of omega-3 fatty
   acids on fibrinogen compared to corn oil (Refs. 10, 118, and
   203). One found a decrease compared to olive oil (Ref. 49) and
   one found a decrease compared to soybean oil only when 30 mL
   of fish oil were consumed, but not when 15 mL were consumed
   (Ref. 57). Additional well-designed studies not cited by LSRO,
   but considered in the FDA proposal, reported no change (Ref.
   24) and an increase
       Therefore, FDA stands by its earlier conclusion that the
   publicly available scientific evidence does not support a
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and decreases in
   fibrinogen or increases in fibrinolysis. This conclusion is
   supported by findings that consumption of other PUFA's have
   effects comparable to those produced by consumption of omega-3
   fatty acids.
       46. Two comments cited unpublished data by Kostner and
   Herrmann, reporting reduced Lp(a) after fish oil consumption.
       FDA was unable to find the full paper by these authors
   showing the decrease in Lp(a). FDA did find a paper by these
   researchers published in 1991 (Ref. 241) that reported no
   effect of fish oils on Lp(a) and did not cite conflicting work
   from their laboratory.
   
    iv. Blood pressure
   
       In its proposal, FDA considered the relationship between
   omega-3 fatty acids and blood pressure, one of the recognized
   risk factors for CHD. FDA stated:
   
       These results for effects of omega-3 fatty acids on blood
   pressure of normal subjects are ambiguous. Some studies found
   a reduction in systolic blood pressure after consumption of
   fish oils containing omega-3 fatty acids, whereas others did
   not.None of the studies found a significant reduction in
   diastolic blood pressure. Therefore, it also remains to be
   established that the normal, healthy population will reduce
   their risk of CHD via a reduction in blood pressure following
   consumption of omega-3 fatty acids.
   
       (56 FR 60663 at 60671.)
       FDA also stated that it was not known whether or not the
   magnitude and duration of the effect would persist after
   longer term supplementation. FDA recognized that studies among
   hypertensives found an effect more consistently than studies
   among normal subjects, although sometimes large amounts of
   fish oils were used.
       47. Some comments considered the effects of omega-3 fatty
   acids on hypertension as evidence of a reduction in CHD risk.
   Other comments called for FDA to reassess the studies on blood
   pressure. One of these comments argued that the results of
   studieson blood pressure are not ``completely'' ambiguous. One
   comment agreed in principle with the agency's assessment of
   the blood pressure studies. One comment considered a number of
   animal models to be relevant for hypertension. The LSRO report
   also considered the evidence relating omega-3 fatty acids to
   blood pressure to be important in relation to CHD. The LSRO
   report concluded that, ``Fish oil probably has a mild
   hypotensive effect, especially in high doses.''
       FDA disagrees that the publicly available scientific
   evidence supports a relationship between omega-3 fatty acids
   and hypertension. At best, as stated in the proposal, the data
   are ambiguous. Qualifiers are needed to indicate that the
   reductions in blood pressure have not generally been shown to
   be specific to omega-3 fatty acids. Also, many valid studies
   have reported no effect.
       LSRO reported a total of 13 studies on hypertension. Four
   were published before 1988, and were not reviewed by FDA in
   the proposed rule. Three of these studies used fish as the
   source of omega-3 fatty acids and therefore did not show the
   effect specifically to be due to omega-3 fatty acids. In fact,
   in one study (Ref. 292), the control diet of meat produced a
   decrease in blood pressure comparable to that of the fish
   diet. The study that used fish oils (Ref. 271) used an olive
   oil control, rather than an oil high in PUFA's. This study is
   the only study to show an effect of omega-3 fatty acids on
   diastolic blood pressure in normal subjects.
       Of the other 10 studies on hypertension described in the
   LSRO report, 6 were also reviewed by FDA (Refs. 11, 57, 80,
   85, 95, and 101). The LSRO and FDA interpretations of the
   results from these papers did not differ in any significant
   regard, exceptthat FDA specifically noted that two of these
   studies (Refs. 85 and 95) used very high amounts (50 mL) of
   fish oil to show the effect. In fact, FDA singled out the
   Bonaa et al. (Ref. 11) and Kestin et al. (Ref. 80) studies as
   well-designed studies that sh1).
       The LSRO report reviewed four papers not originally
   reviewed by FDA (Refs. 190, 285, and 299), including one study
   on linolenic acid outside of the scope of the definition of
   omega-3 fatty acids as used in this regulation (Ref. 262). Two
   other papers that appeared in the LSRO table but not in the
   text (Refs. 203 and 247) were also not reviewed by FDA in its
   proposal.
       FDA agrees with the LSRO interpretation of the Wing et al.
   study (Ref. 299), where subjects remained on blood pressure
   lowering medications and no effects of added fish oils were
   observed.
       FDA disagrees with the LSRO descriptions of the Singer and
   Cobiac studies. The placebo in the Singer study (Ref. 285) was
   olive oil, but this was not pointed out in the LSRO text. The
   reduction of blood pressure observed after fish oil,
   therefore, may have been due to a general unsaturated fatty
   acid effect not specific to omega-3 fatty acids. In the
   description of the Cobiac et al. study (Ref. 190), LSRO did
   not note that fish oil treatment alone (without simultaneous
   reduction of salt) had no effect on blood pressure.
       Two other studies were cited in the LSRO tables but not in
   the text and were not included in the FDA review. Neither of
   these found an effect on blood pressure. Gans et al. (Ref.
   203) used a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled design
   and found a reduction in diastolic blood pressure for both
   fish oil and corn oil (placebo). Meland et al. (Ref. 247)
   carried out a randomized, double-blind multicenter trial among
   40 mildly hypertensive subjects, using 6.8 g EPA plus DHA/day,
   but found no difference in blood pressure compared to a 50:50
   olive:corn oil control.
       Three other large and appropriately controlled studies not
   in the text of the LSRO report but included in its table were
   also reviewed by FDA. Two randomized studies on normal
   subjects (Refs. 9 and 49) and one controlled study among
   mildly hypertensive subjects (Ref. 20) reported no differences
   in blood pressure attributable to omega-3 fatty acids.
       FDA reviewed in its proposal three other randomized,
   double-blind, placebo-controlled studies among healthy
   subjects that were not included in the LSRO review. Two of
   these studies were on normal, healthy subjects (Refs. 6 and
   24) and found a decrease in systolic blood pressure compared
   to a saturated vegetable oil or vitamin E, respectively. The
   third study (Ref. 73) found that omega-3 fatty acids did not
   affect blood pressure in hypertensives or normal men compared
   to wheat germ oil.
       Therefore, FDA concludes that the evidence of an effect of
   omega-3 fatty acids on blood pressure in normal subjects is
   ambiguous, because some studies reported a blood pressure
   lowering effect, whereas other equally well-designed studies
   found no specific effect. Studies among hypertensives found an
   effect more consistently than studies among normal subjects,
   although sometimes large amounts of fish oils were used, and
   many studies did not show that omega-3 fatty acids were more
   effective than other polyunsaturated fats.
       48. Comments stated that other lines of evidence were not
   discussed in the proposal. Examples given were changes in
   plasma viscosity, increased vascular compliance, and reduced
   white blood cell (WBC) count.
       FDA disagrees with the comment with respect to plasma
   viscosity and vascular compliance. In its proposed rule, FDA
   acknowledged that plasma viscosity was decreased and red cell
   deformability was increased by omega-3 fatty acids, but that
   the importance of these effects on the risk of CHD had not
   been established (56 FR 60663 at 60670).
       The agency agrees that it did not systematically consider
   WBC count among the effects produced by omega-3 fatty acids.
   WBC count was not included among the actions of omega-3 fatty
   acids considered in major reviews. FDA notes that WBC count
   has only rter fish oil supplementation (Refs. 183 and 253).
   3. Other relevant information
   
   a. Animal studies
   
       49. Numerous comments asserted that animal studies did not
   receive an appropriate amount of discussion. One of these same
   comments stated that animal studies are not sufficient to
   support the claim, and that clinical trials on effects of
   omega-3 fatty acids directly on CHD are needed. One comment
   criticized FDA's review of animal studies because the negative
   findings have been in inappropriate models and should not have
   been discussed. Another comment stated that they did not
   believe that there is an appropriate animal model for human
   cardiovascular and CHD. The LSRO report considered animal
   studies to provide important evidence for an anti-atherogenic
   effect of fish oils, stating, ``Omega-3 fatty acids have been
   shown to retard the development ofthe atherosclerotic plaque
   in experimental animals including the pig and rhesus monkey.''
       FDA agrees that the evidence from studies in animals
   warrants additional discussion. FDA has reviewed here those
   animal studies that were cited in its proposed rule and those
   that were cited in the LSRO report that were relevant to the
   development of atherosclerosis. Other animal studies relevant
   to the development of atherosclerosis, and animal studies on
   aspects of CHD other than atherosclerosis are reviewed under
   section II.C.3.a. of this document.
       In its proposal, FDA cited eight animal studies and one
   abstract on the development of atherosclerosis that were not
   included in the LSRO review (Refs. 19, 51, 65, 81, 97, 123,
   126, and 151), seven of which reported either no beneficial
   effect or anadverse effect in fish oil supplemented animals.
   Only one animal study on the effects of omega-3 fatty acids on
   restenosis was abstracted by LSRO, although the others cited
   by FDA were described in the LSRO tables.
       Three studies in nonhuman primates have been reported
   (Refs. 27, 47, and 116). In the Davis et al. (Ref. 27) and
   Parks et al. (Ref. 116) studies, the polyunsaturated fat
   intake was higher in the fish oil groups, and polyunsaturated
   fat is known to lower total plasma cholesterol. Also, the
   control diet of the Davis et al. study had more saturated fat
   than the fish oil diet. Thus, the effects on atherosclerosis
   may not have been specific for omega-3 fatty acids.
       In these studies, the total cholesterol values for the
   fish oil groups were substantially lower than for the control
   group, which may explain the observed differences in
   atherosclerosis. In support of this interpretation, Parks et
   al. (Ref. 116) noted that one of monkeys fed the fish oil diet
   responded differently than the other 11 monkeys fed fish oil.
   This one monkey had a plasma cholesterol level comparable to
   that of the lard-fed control monkeys, and also had
   atherosclerosis comparable to the lard-fed monkeys.
       Changes in total cholesterol levels were noted by authors
   of another study in pigs that showed a reduction in
   atherosclerosis concomitant with a reduction in time-weighted
   total cholesterol (Ref. 81). Since cholesterol concentrations
   are not changedby fish oils in humans, animal studies where
   fish oil treatment lowered total cholesterol levels are of
   questionable relevance to the role of omega-3 fatty acids in
   the development of human atherosclerosis.
       A recent study (Ref. 47) in nonhuman primates (vervet)
   compared the effects of fish oil supplementation to sunflower
   oil supplementation in either an atherogenic diet (high fat,
   low polyunsaturated fat to saturated fat ratio, high
   cholesterol) or, following the atherogenic diet, in a
   therapeutic diet (low fat, high polyunsaturated fat to
   saturated fat ratio and low cholesterol). Animals in each diet
   group were matched for serum cholesterol. Sixteen separate
   measures of atherosclerosis were scored, inil fed animals.
       The LSRO report considered the amount of fish oil in the
   diets in this experiment (1.3 to 1.8 percent of calories) too
   low to observe an effect. In fact, FDA calculates a lower
   percent of calories from fish oil (1.0 to 1.5 percent) than
   calculated by LSRO. This level is about half the amount used
   in short-term human studies (i.e., 10 mL/day), and FDA agrees
   that the low level makes it less likely that an effect would
   be observed than if a higher amount had been used. However,
   diets were supplemented for a prolonged period of time (20
   months) and in the therapeutic diet other dietary factors were
   also changed that might have made the effects of omega-3 fatty
   acids more noticeable (e.g., ratio of polyunsaturated to
   saturated fatty acids). Finally, the fact that there were
   differences between the fish oil-supplemented group and the
   polyunsaturated fat group while on either the atherogenic or
   therapeutic regimens suggests that there was sufficient
   sensitivity in the experimental design to detect protective
   effects of omega-3 fatty acids.
       In some animal studies that showed a protective effect of
   fish oils, an invasive procedure was used to accelerate
   atherosclerosis, either mechanical injury (Ref. 122) or vein
   grafts (Refs. 90 and 186). These studies may be most relevant
   to the late stages of atherosclerosis, and to CHD in humans
   following invasive procedures. All of the animal studies cited
   in the LSRO report except Kim et al. (Ref. 81) and Fincham et
   al. (Ref. 47) did not control for PUFA's, so the effects
   observed have not been shown to be specific to omega-3 fatty
   acids. Additionally, the level of use of fish oils has been
   high, e.g., 22 percent of calories in Parks et al. (Ref. 116)
   and 25 percent of the diet in Davis et al. (Ref. 27), which
   limits the extrapolation of findings in these studies to
   levels that might be reasonably consumed by humans.
       FDA disagrees with the summary of the literature in
   animals, as expressed in the LSRO report, because that report
   fails to mention important limitations in the data. FDA notes
   that most studies did not have an adequate design to show
   specificity of effects as due to omega-3 fatty acids.
   Furthermore, reductions in total cholesterol in the fish oil
   fed animals may explain the reported reductions in
   atherosclerosis. Since reasonable amounts of fish oils in
   human diets do not alter serum cholesterol concentrations, the
   results from these animal experiments are of questionable
   importance regarding human atherosclerosis. Finally, LSRO did
   not review numerous animal studies that found no effect or an
   adverse effect of supplementation with fish oils, and
   therefore the LSRO conclusion does not represent the totality
   of publicly available scientific information.
       With these qualifications in mind, FDA notes that some of
   the reported effects of the dietary interventions with fish
   oils on the development of atherosclerosis have been dramatic.
   Also, FDA recognized that animal studies are of great
   importance forstudy of long-term effects on chronic diseases
   of consumption of amounts of omega-3 fatty acids, particularly
   in amounts that might be obtained in a reasonable diet.
   Therefore, FDA encourages further research in this area using
   rigorous study designs and amounts of omega-3 fatty acids
   reasonably available in a normal diet to elucidate any effects
   specific to these fatty acids.
       After closer scrutiny of the animal studies cited in FDA's
   proposal and in the LSRO report, the agency has reached the
   same conclusion that it reached in its proposed rule: there
   are some data in studies from animals which suggest the
   possibility ofa beneficial effect of omega-3 fatty acids on
   CHD; however, the data are equivocal. (56 FR 60663 at 60671.)
   
   b. Safety considerations
   
       50. One comment stated that the increases in LDL
   cholesterol observed were a chance occurrence, and another
   stated that increased LDL should not be considered an adverse
   finding in light of the results of the Burr study.
       FDA disagrees with this comment. FDA found that increased
   LDL cholesterol was ordinarily found when hyperlipidemics or
   diabetics were given fish oil supplements. This may be due in
   part to the fact that fairly large amounts of omega-3 fatty
   acids (i.e., 5 g EPA plus DHA/day or more) were used in these
   studies. Increased LDL is not ordinarily seen in the studies
   on normal subjects.
       FDA does not consider the Burr study (Ref. 16) to have
   established that omega-3 fatty acids reduce the risk of CHD,
   and therefore remains concerned that increases in LDL
   cholesterol could be adverse for some subjects. FDA notes that
   concern about increased LDL cholesterol was expressed in the
   report of the NHLBI consensus development conference (Ref.
   255).
       51. One comment stated that it was inappropriate to
   consider adverse effects in subpopulations without describing
   the advantages of omega-3 fatty acids in those same
   populations.
       FDA disagrees with this comment. As noted in the final
   rule on general requirements for health claims, published
   elsewhere in this issue of the Federal Register, it would be a
   violation of the agency's responsibility under the act to
   authorizea health claim about a substance without being
   satisfied that the use of the substance was safe. The agency
   attempted to examine all available scientific evidence
   regarding the effects of omega-3 fatty acids. FDA separated
   out the potential adverse effects discovered during its
   review, because it wanted to draw attention to these issues as
   impediments to a health claim for omega-3 fatty acids and CHD.
   Such potential adverse effects must be resolved, and may be
   important in setting the conditions under which FDA would
   allow a health claim to appear on the label and labeling of
   foods and food supplements.
       52. Two comments stated that the safety issues raised in
   the Mitre Corp. report (Ref. 72) were outdated but did not
   indicate which issues, or suggest why they were outdated.
       FDA recognizes that there has been considerable debate
   regarding the clinical importance of bleeding times since the
   publication of the Mitre Corp. report (Ref. 72). However, the
   agency believes that the issues raised in that report have
   been restated in subsequent literature, and that all issues of
   safety are important in deciding whether or not to authorize a
   health claim.
       53. A few comments recommended that FDA balance the
   benefits of reduced risk of CHD against the risk of reduced
   glycemic control among diabetics when deciding whether or not
   to authorize a health claim. One comment stated that
   physicians could adjust the dose of insulin if omega-3 fatty
   acids reduced their glycemic control, but another comment
   stated that glycemic control must be considered a real adverse
   effect.
       FDA agrees that limitations on the use of a substance by a
   subpopulation (e.g., diabetics) do not necessarily exclude a
   substance from bearing a health claim for the general
   population, because the claim may be appropriately restricted.
   However, FDAagrees that the loss of glycemic control is a
   potentially serious adverse effect that must be fully
   addressed before a health claim could be authorized.
       54. Another comment stated that a major concern about
   omega-3 fatty acids not mentioned in the proposed rule is that
   they may be oxidized and, as oxidized products, may have
   adverse effects.
       FDA agrees that oxidation of omega-3 fatty acids is a
   concern. In fact, there are many studies that have been
   reported since the publication of the proposed rule, or that
   were not included in FDA's literature review, that indicate
   such a concern (Refs. 184, 210, 217, 229, 240, 248, 263, 283,
   and 290).
       Antioxidants have been successfully added to supplements
   and may be adequate to protect the omega-3 fatty acids in
   foods. It may be necessary to establish conditions that
   protect against oxidation of omega-3 fatty acids and
   incorporate those condition
       55. A related comment indicated that the majority of the
   fish oil preparations that have been used are severely
   oxidized, including National Institutes of Health Fish Oil
   Test Materials. However, no data regarding the extent of
   oxidation, the natureof the oxidation products, or the
   physiologic action of these products was provided.
       FDA agrees with this comment. Many of the biologically
   active products of omega-3 fatty acids are oxidation products.
   Oxidation of test materials may explain some contradictory
   findings in the literature.
       56. One comment pointed out that increased prothrombin
   times and possibility of increased stroke were not discussed.
       FDA agrees with this comment. FDA did not specifically
   review data on prothrombin times, although data on bleeding
   times as a measure of hemostasis were discussed for both
   normal subjects and for subjects with risk factors for CHD.
   The importance ofthe increase in bleeding time brought about
   by supplemental fish oils or increased fish consumption is not
   clear. FDA noted in the proposal that most reports suggest
   that serious bleeding is not an issue in patients supplemented
   with omega-3 fatty acids, and also that standardized bleeding
   times do not closely correlate with clinically significant
   bleeding. However, concerns about untoward bleeding after
   supplemental fish oils have been raised in the literature
   (Refs. 106, 120, and 189).
       FDA did not discuss the possibility of increased
   occurrence of stroke as a consequence of increased consumption
   of omega-3 fatty acids. The papers that reported a correlation
   between high consumption of omega-3 fatty acids from fish and
   other marineanimals and low rate of CHD mortality also noted
   an increase rate of stroke, particularly hemorrhagic stroke
   (Refs. 8 and 84). Also, the possibility of increased rates of
   stroke are raised by the data from studies on aspirin (Ref.
   66).
       Thus, FDA considers these potential adverse reactions to
   be legitimate concerns, primarily in the context of very high
   intakes of omega-3 fatty acids.
       57. One comment stated that even if adverse effects were
   only suspected in a medical disorder, pronounced warnings or
   contraindications would be required.
       As noted above, the agency must be satisfied that the use
   of a substance is safe before it will authorize a health claim
   about the substance. Thus, suspicions about potential adverse
   effects would need to be resolved prior to the authorization
   of a claim. Certain health claims may require appropriate
   qualification as a way of minimizing potential safety
   concerns.
   
   C. New Scientific Data
   
       To determine whether or not new scientific data published
   since the proposed rule provided a basis for modifying FDA's
   conclusions regarding the relationship between omega-3 fatty
   acids and risk of CHD, FDA conducted a search of the
   scientific literature for relevant studies. Reviews published
   since the period covered in the literature review in FDA's
   proposed rule were used to identify recently published
   studies.
   1. Epidemiologic studies
   
   a. Cross-sectional studies and surveys (Table 1)
   
       Bulliyya et al. (Ref. 185) found lower total serum
   cholesterol and higher HDL cholesterol in a fish-consuming
   coastal village population than in a nonfish-consuming
   population from the interior of India. These correlational
   data are consistent with a beneficial effect of omega-3 fatty
   acids on blood lipids, but many possible confounding variables
   prevent strong conclusions regarding a specific role for
   omega-3 fatty acids.
       In a retrospective study, Popeski et al. (Ref. 266) found
   that women from communities with higher marine oil consumption
   had significantly lower diastolic pressure in the last 6 hours
   of pregnancy than women from communities with low fish oil
   consumption. Pregnancy associated hypertension was 2.6 times
   more common in communities with low fish consumption. These
   correlational data are consistent with an effect of omega-3
   fatty acids on blood pressure in this particular situation.
   Again, many possible
   
   b. Prospective studies (other than intervention studies)
   (Table 1)
   
       Bjerregaard and Dyerberg (Ref. 176) reported
   age-standardized mortality rates per 10,000 person-years for
   CHD in men in Greenland settlements (5.3) as half of that
   reported for men in Denmark (10.0). There was an increasing
   rate of CHD from settlements to towns in Greenland. The
   difference in rates of CHD in women were less apparent, with
   lower rates in Denmark than in towns in Greenland. These
   studies do not have sufficient specificity to identify omega-3
   fatty acids as causal in reducing CHD, butare consistent with
   the hypothesis that they are.
       Van Houwelingen et al. (Ref. 294) found that, while men
   from a high fish consumption group had higher concentrations
   of plasma phospholipid EPA and DHA than men from a low fish
   consumption group, there was no significant difference in
   collagen-induced platelet aggregation, cutaneous bleeding
   time, ATP-release in whole blood, or platelet number between
   the two groups. This study suggests that the outcome measures
   found commonly to be affected in clinical studies may not be
   related to consumption of omega-3 fatty acids in the
   free-living population.
   
   c. Intervention studies
   
       There were no new prospective intervention studies
   measuring occurrence of heart attacks or CHD mortality.
   2. Evidence relating omega-3 fatty acids to intermediate or
   surrogate markers of CHD (Table 2)
   
   a. Atherosclerosis
   
   i. Blood lipids
   
       Through its own literature review, FDA has found another
   34 studies not reviewed in the proposal that report data for
   serum cholesterol after consumption of fish containing omega-3
   fatty acids or fish oil concentrated in omega-3 fatty acids.
   Among these, 25 found no change in blood cholesterol levels, 3
   found an increase, and 6 found a decrease.
       Studies among normal healthy subjects generally reported
   no change in total cholesterol (Refs. 168, 196, 202, 210, 217,
   220, 235, 241, 253, 254, and 277), although none of these
   studies was controlled for nonspecific effects of the omega-3
   fatty acids as polyunsaturated fats.
       One study among normal subjects found that feeding a high
   fish diet did not change total cholesterol, unless combined
   with a low total fat and low saturated fat diet (Ref. 168).
   Another study (Ref. 301) reported decreased total cholesterol
   after switching from a meat diet to a fish diet, but the fish
   diet had significantly less saturated fat than the meat diet.
   One study (Ref. 283) found a slight increase after 5.4 g EPA
   plus DHA/day from MaxEPA (with 30 percent saturated fatty
   acids), and one study (Ref. 224) found a slight reduction in
   total cholesterol after 2.7 g purified EPA/day, but neither
   study was placebo controlled for effects of polyunsaturated
   and saturated fat contained in the supplements.
       Similarly, nearly all of the 17 studies on subjects in
   at-risk subpopulations, including all of the studies that
   controlled for PUFA's (Refs. 203, 209, 247, and 258), found no
   effect of supplemental omega-3 fatty acids on total
   cholesterol (except for a post hoc analysis of a subgroup in
   one study, (Ref. 209)). One study in diabetics (Ref. 252)
   found an increase in serum cholesterol, but the statistical
   significance of the result may have been due in part to a
   change in the opposite direction in the control group. One
   study among hyperlipidemics (Ref. 191) found decreased
   cholesterol after relatively high doses (4.6 to 6 g EPA plus
   DHA/day) but not after 3.6 g EPA plus DHA/day, and did not
   control for PUFA effects of the supplements. The other study
   that reported decreased cholesterol after supplemental omega-3
   fatty acids (Ref. 268), similarly, found the effect after a
   high level (6 percent of calories, 16 to 21 g EPA plus
   DHA/day) and did not control for the polyunsaturated fat
   effects of the supplement.
       These studies support the conclusion reached in the
   proposed rule, that among normal, healthy subjects there is no
   significant effect of omega-3 fatty acids from fish or fish
   oils on total serum cholesterol.
       FDA concluded in the proposed rule that the best studies
   among normal subjects found no effect of fish oils on LDL
   cholesterol. All of the additional studies among normal
   healthy subjects obtained in FDA's updated literature search
   have reported no change in LDL cholesterol (Refs. 220, 253,
   253, and 277).
       One study (Ref. 224) reported that purified EPA produced a
   significant decrease in a subfraction of large, light LDL
   cholesterol (LDL1), and a significant increase in small, dense
   LDL cholesterol (LDL2), but FDA calculates no change for the
   sum of these two fractions of LDL cholesterol. Some clinical
   studies reviewed in the proposed rule (Refs. 1, 43, 53, and
   129) described changes in the composition of LDL particle
   after consumption of fish oil.
       The relative importance of various subfractions of LDL
   particles (and the associated composition of the particles),
   however, is still controversial. While Homma et al. (Ref. 224)
   suggest that large, light LDL are the fraction associated most
   closelywith atherosclerosis, Austin et al. (Ref. 171) report
   that the phenotype of small, dense LDL is the fraction most
   closely related to increased CHD risk. The February 1992 NHLBI
   consensus development conference (Ref. 255) included among its
   recommendations for further research the identification of the
   atherogenic and anti-atherogenic subfractions that may be
   present in VLDL and HDL; the uncertainty about the relevance
   of changes in the amounts of subfractions of these two
   lipoproteins similarly appliesto LDL.
       In at-risk populations, there have been some additional
   reports of increased LDL cholesterol after fish oil
   supplementation (Refs. 170, 191, and 251), a concern raised in
   the proposal. However, most studies have found LDL cholesterol
   not changed by fish oils (Refs. 174, 189, 205, 209, 219, 258,
   and 278). Moreover, each of the studies that used a
   polyunsaturated fat placebo control group found no change in
   LDL cholesterol (Refs. 203, 209, and 258).
       Therefore, FDA concludes that these most recently reviewed
   studies support the conclusion reached in the proposed rule,
   that for the general population, there is no significant
   effect of omega-3 fatty acids on LDL cholesterol. The results
   of recent studies among at-risk subjects, however, are not in
   complete agreement with the conclusions in the proposed rule,
   and suggest that omega-3 fatty acids may not uniformly
   increase LDL cholesterol. Additional study is needed to
   determine the conditions under which LDL cholesterol is
   increased by omega-3 fatty acids.
       Among more recent studies in normal healthy subjects found
   in FDA's updated literature review, about half have found no
   effect of fish oils or fish on HDL cholesterol (Refs. 202,
   206, 217, 219 (after 1.25 and 2.5 g/day EPA plus DHA), 226
   (after 1 and 3 g/day EPA plus DHA), 241, and 244), but about
   half have found increased HDL (Refs. 210, 219 (after 3.75 and
   5 g/day EPA plus DHA), 220, 226 (after 6 g/day EPA plus DHA),
   235, 253 (compared to baseline, significant compared to olive
   oil control), 278,283, and 301), including a metabolic ward
   study that very carefully controlled for total fat and
   saturated fat intake (Ref. 253). Weintraub et al. (Ref. 298)
   found decreased HDL after fish oil compared to a saturated fat
   diet.
       FDA attempted to ascertain how those studies that reported
   an increase in HDL cholesterol after increased intake of
   omega-3 fatty acids differed from those studies in which no
   effect was found. However, there was no apparent difference
   between the studies that reported that omega-3 fatty acids
   reduced HDL cholesterol and those that reported no change.
   Most of the studies that found a change used supplements
   containing substantial amounts (e.g., 30 percent) of saturated
   fatty acids, raising the possibility that the saturated fatty
   acids in the supplements were responsible for the increase in
   HDL (Ref. 17). However, some supplements had low amounts of
   saturated fatty acids (Ref. 278) or saturated fat in the diet
   was specifically controlled (Ref. 235),gnificantly more
   saturated fat than the fish diet (Ref. 301), so the saturated
   fat intake during omega-3 fatty acid supplementation cannot be
   the factor responsible for increased HDL.
       The amounts of omega-3 fatty acids used in those studies
   that reported increased HDL tended to be high (e.g., more than
   5 g EPA plus DHA/day), but some studies that found a change
   used lower amounts (Ref. 278) and some studies that used high
   amountsfound no change (e.g., Ref. 241 (used 6.7 g EPA plus
   DHA/day) and 253 (used 8 g/day)). Some studies in which fish
   was fed, rather than fish oil, found an effect (Refs. 235 and
   301), but others did not (Refs. 206 and 244). There was no
   systematic difference in sample sizes of the studies that
   found an effect and those that did not; seven of the negative
   studies reviewed in the proposed rule or in the present
   document had 30 or more subjects, compared to only one of the
   positive studies. Small studies (n= 10 or fewer) may not have
   observed a significant difference because of small sample
   size, but larger studies did not find a significant
   difference, even though some found a trend toward increased
   HDL after fish oil supplementation (Ref. 217).
       Finally, the enrichment of plasma phospholipids with EPA
   and DHA tended to be higher for subjects in studies where
   increased HDL was found than that for subjects in the studies
   where no change in HDL was found, reflecting the tendency of
   higher doses to produce increased HDL. In particular, all
   studies in which the plasma phospholipid EPA value was 3.9
   percent or more found increased HDL. However, the studies that
   fed the highest amounts of EPA but that did not find an effect
   on HDL did not report data for phospholipid EPA, so it is not
   clear whether high phospholipid EPA is uniformly associated
   with increased HDL. Comparable results were found after
   inspection of data on phospholipid DHA after supplementation,
   however, because not all studies reported phospholipid fatty
   acid values, no conclusion can be drawn about the relationship
   between phospholipid DHA and HDL concentration. Notably,
   recent data suggest a direct correlation between plasma EPA
   and HDL, but an inverse relationship between plasma DHA and
   HDL (Refs. 177 and 178), underscoring the importance of
   reporting these data in future studies.
       Among subjects with risk factors for CHD fewer reports
   found increased HDL (Refs. 191 (for type IV on SuperEPA only),
   195, 203, 209 (for type IIb), and 219) than found no change
   (Refs. 170, 174, 189, 191 (for type IIb and type IV on
   MaxEPA), 209 (type IV), 224, 258, 263, 277, and 299).
       Few studies have controlled for effects of PUFA's by
   giving a PUFA supplement. Two papers found no change in HDL in
   normal subjects fed fish oil as Promega (Ref. 73) or MaxEPA
   (Ref. 166) compared to wheat-germ oil or safflower oil (Refs.
   73 and 166,respectively). Cobiac et al. (Ref. 20) reported
   increased HDL for mildly hypertensive subjects fed salmon and
   sardines in sild oil compared to those given a safflower-olive
   oil mix, but in comparable subjects, Meland et al. (Ref. 247)
   found no change inHDL cholesterol after MaxEPA fish oil
   compared to when the subjects were given a corn-olive oil mix.
   Very recent results, also for a mildly hypertensive
   population, found increased HDL after either, ethyl esters of
   EPA and DHA, or after corn oil (Ref. 177). Thus, for normal
   and hypertensive subjects, the change in HDL appears to not be
   a specific effect of omega-3 fatty acids, but may be related
   nonspecifically to increased PUFA's, either omega-3 fatty
   acids or omega-6 fatty acids.
       In contrast, there are two reports of increased HDL
   cholesterol in subjects with type Iib hyperlipidemia fed fish
   oil compared to safflower oil (Ref. 166) or a corn-olive oil
   mix (Ref. 209), and one report of increased HDL in type IIa
   hyperlipidemics
       Therefore, at this time, FDA concludes that there is some
   evidence that omega-3 fatty acids, in some form and amount and
   in some selected populations, may increase HDL cholesterol,
   but that current data are ambiguous because the conditions
   under which fish oils reliably increase (total) HDL
   cholesterol have not been established, either in a specific
   subpopulation, or in the general population.
       When fractions of HDL cholesterol have been reported, an
   increase has generally been found in the HDL2 fraction (Refs.
   1, 9, 54, 148, 191, 202, 203, 220, 235, 251, and 286), with a
   comparable decrease in the HDL3 fraction (Refs. 202,235, 251,
   and 286). Interestingly, the two recent reports that failed to
   find increased HDL2 both used esterified omega-3 fatty acids
   rather than the fish oil triglyceride (Refs. 191 and 224),
   although others using ethyl esters have found increased HDL2
   (Refs. 9 and 286).
       These studies suggest that fish oils produce a shift
   within the HDL fractions toward a lipid-rich, and away from a
   protein-rich lipoprotein, as well as within the LDL fractions.
   This shift may occur whether or not there is any change in
   total HDL cholesterol. FDA noted (56 FR 60663 at 60669) that
   some studies among normal subjects found increases in the HDL2
   fraction of HDL cholesterol, and that these reports were the
   most promising changes in blood lipids. New studies published
   afterthe period covered in FDA's review of the literature,
   however, found that both HDL2, and HDL3 were correlated with
   reduced risk of MI (Refs. 185a and 287a), and the NHLBI
   consensus conference (Ref. 255) concluded that, ``The current
   studies of HDL2 and HDL3 levels have not shown consistent
   associations with CHD.'' Therefore, data on changes in HDL
   subfractions after increased consumption of omega-3 fatty
   acids do not provide a sufficient basis for a health claim,
   becausethere is not significant scientific agreement that the
   endpoints are directly related to risk of CHD. If the risk of
   CHD becomes linked with particular subfractions of these
   lipoproteins, these findings in normal subjects may be of
   great importance.
       However, FDA also notes that recently published data from
   a prospective study demonstrate an effect of aspirin
   consumption in reducing the incidence of first heart attacks
   among women (Ref. 243). Another study shows a relationship
   between spontaneous platelet aggregation in vitro and
   incidence of CHD (Ref. 288). Both studies were conducted in
   the general population and their results support the
   hypothesis that platelet aggregation is a useful marker for
   CHD risk in the general population. Additionally, preliminary
   data from the Caerphilly Collaborative Heart Disease Study
   (Ref. 302) supports a relationship between platelet
   aggregation and the incidence of ischemic heart disease; final
   data from this study will be available in the near future.
   These recently published and forthcoming studies may provide
   the basis for significant scientific agreement regarding the
   use of platelet function as a surrogate marker for CHD risk
   among the general population.
   
    ii. Vessel wall effects.
   
       New human studies on the effects of omega-3 fatty acids on
   vessel wall effects were discussed in response to comments 35
   through 37 of this document. A recent meta-analysis of studies
   on use of fish oils in the prevention of restenosis concluded
   that the most plausible interpretation of the results was that
   there was a small to moderate beneficial effect of fish oils,
   but that chance could not be ruled out as a cause of the
   results (Ref. 260). The authors noted a significant
   heterogeneity in the findings and concluded that data from a
   large clinical study are necessary to confirm their
   interpretation. No study of restenosis to date has compared
   fish oil to an alternate polyunsaturated oil to control for
   nonspecific effects of PUFA's.
   
   b. Thrombosis and hemostasis
   
   i. Bleeding times
   
       A number of studies have reported data that show no
   significant effect of fish oils on standardized bleeding time
   tests (Refs. 179, 218, 253, 268, and 277). However, others
   have found a significant increase in bleeding time due to fish
   oil (Refs. 195, 219, 220, and 278) or salmon (Ref. 297) or
   have reported increased bleeding as a side effect of treatment
   (Refs. 189 and 295).
   
    ii. Platelet aggregation.
   
       Consistent with the literature previously reviewed, recent
   studies show that fish oil tends to decrease platelet
   aggregation to numerous stimuli including AA (Refs. 179 and
   256), adenosine diphosphate (ADP) (Refs. 204, 256, and 297),
   collagen (Refs.218, 241, 251, and 297), thrombin (Ref. 241),
   and PAF (Ref. 251). Only one of these studies controlled for
   effects due to PUFA's (Ref. 204). The importance of the
   polyunsaturated fat control is less critical for studies on
   platelet function than for studies on blood lipids, because
   nonomega-3 PUFA's (i.e., omega-6 fatty acids derived from
   plant oils) produce effects in the opposite direction in
   platelets as omega-3 fatty acids (whereas many of the blood
   lipid effects of these two classes of fatty acidsare in the
   same direction). Thus, the effects of omega-3 fatty acids on
   platelet responsiveness are not likely to be produced by
   PUFA's in general.
       The only new study among healthy subjects that reported no
   difference in responsiveness to ADP used EPA ethyl esters as
   the source of omega-3 fatty acids (Ref. 179). Furthermore, the
   data were not shown in this brief report, so it is not clear
   if there was a trend toward an effect that might not have been
   statistically significant due to small number of subjects
   (eight per group). Those studies in healthy subjects reviewed
   in the proposed rule that did not find statistically
   significant differencesin platelet responsiveness to ADP did
   have trends in the direction of reduced responsiveness (Refs.
   24 and 54).
       Other studies found no effect of fish oils on platelet
   aggregation in response to collagen (Refs. 179, 256 and 277).
   Each of these studies had a relatively small number of
   subjects, and there was a trend toward decreased sensitivity
   toward collagen at a high dose of omega-3 fatty acids in one
   study (Ref. 277). However, in the recent metabolic ward study
   (Ref. 256) there was no trend toward decreased sensitivity
   toward collagen or thrombin. These findings contrast with the
   results described above (Refs. 218, 241, 251, and 297) and
   with studies in healthy subjects described in the proposed
   rule (Refs. 2, 24, 54, 96, 143, and 166).
       Studies reporting no effect of fish oils on PAF or
   AA-induced platelet aggregation (Refs. 179 and 218) may not
   have had sufficient power to find a statistically significant
   difference; where the data were reported there was a trend
   toward decreased sensitivity for both agents (Ref. 218).
   
    iii. Platelet adhesion
   
       A provocative study by Li and Steiner (Ref. 234) showed a
   60-percent decrease in the extent to which platelets prepared
   from subjects fed fish oils adhered to substrates in a laminar
   flow chamber. The high flow rates used in this experiment
   showed that the change in adhesiveness of the platelets was
   due to changes on the platelet surface, and not due to a
   difference in the amount of material released from platelets
   that subsequently caused adhesion (i.e., AA). Also, a
   dose-response relationship wasobserved, and the time to return
   to pre-fish oil adhesion values was related to the amount
   consumed.
       However, another study found no effect on fish oils on in
   vitro platelet adhesion to everted rabbit aorta, although
   there was a trend toward increased adhesion after 2 and 4
   weeks of supplementation (Ref. 264). The reperfusion assay
   used in this study does not distinguish platelet membrane
   effects from effects mediated by substances released from
   platelets. Neither of these studies used a nonomega-3 PUFA
   control.
   
    iv. Regulators of bleeding
   
       Two recent studies in normal subjects have reported that
   omega-3 fatty acids have no effect on the clotting protein
   fibrinogen (Refs. 183 and 210), although in one of these
   studies a large supplement of vitamin E was associated with a
   decrease (Ref.210). An uncontrolled study in normal subjects
   found a decrease in fibrinogen after fish oil supplementation
   (Ref. 278).
       Studies on subjects at risk for CHD have reported no
   change (Ref. 203), a decrease (Refs. 276 and 277), and an
   increase in fibrinogen (Ref. 287). In agreement with its
   tentative conclusion in the proposed rule, FDA finds that the
   data on the effectsof omega-3 fatty acids on fibrinogen level
   are ambiguous, because they do not distinguish effects due to
   PUFA's from effects specific to omega-3 fatty acids.
       Plasminogen is an enzyme that dissolves clots. Plasminogen
   activator is a substance that increases clot dissolving;
   plasminogen activator is specifically inhibited by another
   substance, the PAI - 1. Thus, a high level of PAI - 1
   decreases the capability to dissolve clots.
       Three recent studies reported increased concentrations of
   PAI - 1 after fish oil supplementation (Refs. 254, 278, and
   287), which would appear inconsistent with a clot-dissolving
   effect of fish oil. Two of these investigators also found no
   change inthe amount of plasminogen activator (t-PA) after
   supplemental fish oil (Refs. 254 and 287) including one who
   used a very specific immunologic assay (Ref. 254), suggesting
   that fish oils do not increase clot dissolution by increasing
   the amount of this protein. The third group, however, found an
   increase in the activity of tissue plasminogen activator (Ref.
   277), which suggests that fish oils might increase clot
   dissolution by a different mechanism than affecting the amount
   of activator. Another group found no effect of cod liver oil
   on t-PA activity or fibrinolysis measured directly (Ref. 216).
   These reports are in contradiction to a report of increased
   fibrinolytic activity after a fish or fish plus fish oil diet
   (Ref. 183). FDA has not been able to find a reason for this
   rather marked contradiction. Therefore, in agreement with the
   conclusion in its proposed rule, FDA finds there is no clear
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and factors involved
   in dissolving blood clots, or clot dissolutionactivity.
       Numerous investigators (Refs. 174, 191, 210, 220, 235,
   241, and 279) have recently reported that fish oils do not
   affect the concentration of Lp(a), a lipoprotein correlated
   with the risk of CHD. One investigator reported that very high
   levels of fish oils (9 g EPA plus DHA/day) gave a trend toward
   lower values, but the response may have been due to the PUFA's
   (Ref. 279). One study reported no effect overall of fish oils
   on Lp(a) among hypertriglyceridemics, but Lp(a) was reduced in
   those whose initial values were high (Ref. 174). On the basis
   of these reports and those reviewed in the proposed rule, FDA
   concludes that omega-3 fatty acids do not affect the risk of
   CHD by lowering Lp(a).
   
    v. Blood pressure
   
       Most of the studies not reviewed in the proposed rule that
   report data on blood pressure after consumption of fish oils
   have not found a significant change. One study of 50 elderly,
   healthy subjects reported that fish oils in combination with a
   salt-restricted diet decreased both systolic and diastolic
   blood pressure, but that fish oil alone had no effect (Ref.
   190). There was a reduction in blood pressure during the
   run-in period, when the polyunsaturated fat placebo, sunflower
   oil, was fed.
       Most studies on subjects with mild hypertension also have
   reported no change (Refs. 247, 277, and 289), including one
   large, randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial of
   various behavioral changes and dietary supplements (Ref. 289).
   One study in hypertensives found reduced systolic and
   diastolic blood pressure comparable to reductions after the
   hypertension medication propranolol (Ref. 285), and in some
   cases the combined treatment of fish oil plus propranolol gave
   a greater decrease than eitdouble-blind randomized,
   placebo-controlled study in hypertensives whose blood
   pressures were maintained by medications found comparable
   blood pressure lowering compared to pretreatment values by
   fish oil or olive oil placebo (Ref. 299).
       One uncontrolled study among hyperlipidemics also found
   reduced systolic and diastolic blood pressure (Ref. 263), but
   no effect was found in uncontrolled trials in subjects with
   end-stage renal disease (Ref. 207) or diabetics (Ref. 215). In
   a polyunsaturated fat (corn oil) controlled study on subjects
   with stable claudication (Ref. 203) fish oil and corn oil both
   reduced diastolic blood pressure comparably, but systolic
   blood pressure was only reduced by the corn oil treatment.
       The results of these studies support the tentative
   conclusions reached in the proposed rule, that omega-3 fatty
   acids reduce blood pressure to a small degree in hypertensive
   people, but that it is not clear if there is any specific
   effect among normal subjects.
   3. Other relevant information
   
   a. Animal studies
   
       Animal studies are especially important for studying
   effects of long-term consumption of omega-3 fatty acids, where
   there are few data from human intervention studies. The animal
   studies cited in the proposed rule related to the ability of
   omega-3 fatty acids to inhibit the development of
   atherosclerosis, an area not readily available for study in
   humans. A more complete discussion of the previously cited
   studies, with emphasis on those studies in nonhuman primates,
   is given in response to comment 47 of this document. Other
   recent animal studies cited in the comments or found during
   FDA's updated literature search that provide data on the
   development of atherosclerosis (where atherosclerosis is
   measured directly) are reviewed here. Also reviewed are
   studies on effects of omega-3 fatty acids during experimental
   ischemia, obviously not available for human study.
   
    i. Atherosclerosis
   
       One recent study in rabbits found less atherosclerosis in
   fish oil-supplemented animals, but there was no control for
   PUFA's, and the fish oil-treated animals also had reduced
   serum cholesterol (Ref. 192). Because humans do not have
   reduced serum cholesterol after fish oil consumption, these
   results are of questionable relevance to humans. Furthermore,
   the effect cannot be attributed specifically to omega-3 fatty
   acids rather than to polyunsaturated fats in general.
       Fish oil feeding has also been associated with reduced
   binding of LDL to the blood vessel endothelium in monkeys
   (Ref. 193), and purified EPA ethyl ester was reported to
   reduce susceptibility of LDL to oxidation (Ref. 273), but
   these studies did notcontrol for PUFA's. The antioxidant
   levels in the diets with respect to the amount of omega-3
   fatty acids may be as important in determining whether or not
   there is any effect of omega-3 fatty acids on the oxidation of
   LDL.
       Three recent papers describe effects of fish oils fed
   before surgical grafting of a vein into an artery, a procedure
   associated with an accelerated development of atherosclerosis.
   Two papers (Refs. 275 and 303) each used a polyunsaturated fat
   control and studied fish oil effects after vein allografts in
   animals treated with the immunosuppressant cyclosporin. In one
   study (Ref. 303), six groups of rabbits received one of three
   amounts of fish oil (giving 29, 87 and 174 mg EPA plus DHA/kg,
   respectively, similar amounts to those used in most human
   studies) or comparable amounts of safflower oil. In this
   study, safflower oil was more effective at reducing
   cholesterol than fish oil, and there was a trend toward more
   protection from atherosclerosis in the safflower oil-fed
   group. In the other study (Ref. 275), rats received, in
   addition to cyclosporin, either fish oil (containing 210 mg
   EPA plus DHA/kg), or safflower oil with aspirin, or safflower
   oil only. The fish oil group had remarkably less
   atheroscression and the same polyunsaturated fat control, may
   be related to dose and species differences.
       A third study of vein allografts in dogs (Ref. 274) found
   significantly less atherosclerosis in fish oil-fed animals
   either fed the fish oil alone or in combination with aspirin
   or a thromboxane synthetase inhibitor. Other animals were
   treated with aspirin only or a thromboxane synthetase
   inhibitor only. There was no difference among groups for blood
   lipids, platelet function or eicosanoid metabolism. This study
   suggests that mechanisms of atherosclerosis other than those
   involving blood lipids andplatelet function may be affected by
   omega-3 fatty acids.
       These animal models are most relevant to comparable
   surgical procedures or other invasive procedures (e.g.,
   angioplasty) that would be expected to activate platelets in
   humans. Use of omega-3 fatty acids in these settings is a drug
   usage, but provides information on the extent to which omega-3
   fatty acids may modify platelet response in vivo. The very
   different results of omega-3 fatty acids in modifying the
   response to vein allografts in immune-suppressed animals
   indicates that the actions of omega-3 fatty acids in these
   settings are not yet well established.
   
    ii. Response to ischemia
   
       One major line of research on omega-3 fatty acids in
   animals is experimental ischemia (deficiency of blood flow to
   the heart). Force et al. (Ref. 199) found that rats fed a diet
   containing a high amount of fish oil (20 percent of the diet)
   for 6 to 12 weeks had much greater blood flow once the
   occlusion was removed than rats fed diets enriched in corn oil
   or lard. There were no differences among diet groups in the
   amount of tissue damaged by ischemia. Increased blood flow
   after ischemia has also been reported in a pig model (Ref.
   221). This study did not control for polyunsaturated fat and
   used a lower amount of omega-3 fatty acids, and the
   differences in blood flow were not as pronounced as in the
   Force study. Another study found evidence of lesstissue damage
   during reperfusion when rats had been fed a diet with 12
   percent fish oil compared to other rats fed the same level of
   corn oil (Ref. 223). Another study in yet a third animal
   species (Ref. 230) showed that the functional capillary
   densitywas preserved during reperfusion in hamsters fed 5
   percent fish oil for 4 weeks prior to experimental ischemia.
       A reperfusion study in dogs determined the effects of fish
   oil on the duration of time needed for drug-induced
   reperfusion following an electrically induced blockage, and on
   the occurrence of spontaneous reocclusion in the reopened
   vessel (Ref. 182). High amounts of fish oil (one-third of
   total calories) for 3 weeks before the surgery resulted in a
   shorter time needed for the drug-induced reperfusion, but did
   not affect the time necessary for the electrically mediated
   occlusion to occur, the occurrence of second occlusion, or the
   time it took for the second occlusions to appear. This study
   did not have a polyunsaturated fat control, and even at the
   high intake only a modest effect of omega-3 fatty acids on
   platelet function was seen, that being primarily an
   enhancement of the effects of the fibrinolytic drug.
       Another possible consequence of ischemia is arrhythmia,
   when the heart fails to maintain its normal rhythmic beating.
   The effects of fish oils on arrhythmia in monkeys are
   discussed in response to comment 39 of this document.
   Similarly, data have been reported for experimental ischemia
   in rats that show that both fish oil and sunflower oil reduced
   the occurrence of arrhythmia during occlusion and reperfusion
   compared to a saturated fat diet (Ref. 246). Another study,
   done on isolated, cultured rat heart cells (myocytes) showed
   that EPA, but not AA, prevented a known toxin (ouabain) from
   disturbing the rhythmic contractions and killing the cells
   (Ref. 212). The effective amount of EPA was so low that the
   mode of action was proposed to be due to produ suggests a
   specific effect of EPA in stabilizing the heart myocytes
   during stress. Prevention of arrhythmia by stabilization of
   these heart cells has been proposed as a mechanism by which
   omega-3 fatty acids may increase the chances of survival
   following a heart attack as reported in the Dart study (Ref.
   16).
       These studies indicate that, in various animal models,
   dietary fish oils promote greater reestablishment of blood
   flow in heart tissues following a transient block, as occurs
   in an acute heart attack. Importantly, the results are
   consistent across many animal species, and in some cases have
   been shown to be specific for omega-3 fatty acids rather than
   simply due to any PUFA. Finally, the experimental designs
   included coronary occlusions in otherwise healthy animals who
   were not suffering from heartdisease, a model relevant for use
   of omega-3 fatty acids in reducing the risk of CHD rather than
   in therapy for persons with preexisting heart disease. The
   studies remain limited in that ischemia was produced by an
   acute blockage produced by mechanical or electrical means
   rather than by chronic dietary means, and the response to
   these different types of block may not be the same.
       Other studies have attempted to learn the mechanism by
   which the platelet-vessel wall interactions are modified by
   omega-3 fatty acids. One study (Ref. 240) found that aortas
   from rats fed fish oil or corn oil did not contract as much in
   response toagents that cause contraction as aortas from rats
   fed beef tallow (saturated fat). This was true both before and
   after oxygen deprivation. The aortas from fish oil-fed rats
   were more responsive to one of three tested chemical relaxers
   than aortas from corn oil-fed or beef tallow-fed rats. Another
   study found that EPA potentiated the release of an EDRF (Ref.
   181), but the effect was thought to be related to the
   unsaturation of the EPA, because the experiments were carried
   out in the presence of inhibitors of EPA metabolism.
       One research group has recently shown that leukotrienes,
   chemicals produced from AA, are important in the tissue injury
   that accompanies reperfusion (Refs. 230 and 232). Since EPA
   competes with AA for the enzyme that makes leukotrienes from
   AA, EPA could potentially reduce the amount of leukotriene
   formed from AA. This same group has shown that leukotrienes
   promote the adhesion of leukocytes to the vessel wall (Ref.
   231), and that feeding hamsters fish oil at 5 percent of the
   diet for 4 weeks greatly reduced (over 60 percent) the
   adhesion of leukocytes to the vessel wall (Ref. 233). The
   reduced adhesion could be relevant for both the conditions
   during which atherosclerosis develops (indeed, the stimulus
   used to elicit leukocyte adhesion was oxidized LDL, a
   candidate for promoting atherosclerosis in humans), and the
   acute response to coronary ischemia.
       These animal data suggest mechanisms by which omega-3
   fatty acids could affect the development of atherosclerosis or
   the response of heart tissue after a transient occlusion of
   its blood flow. Both modes of action could make important
   contributions to the risk of CHD and, therefore, merit
   additional study. The reperfusion studies and the myocyte
   toxicity study have demonstrated specificity of the effect as
   to omega-3 fatty acids. However, the increase in reperfusion
   volume is not sufficient to ensure a reduced risk of CHD
   death. Omega-3 fatty acids may not affect the extent of tissue
   damaged during an occlusion, or the tendency for a second,
   spontaneous occlusion. Additionally, omega-3 fatty acids may
   not affect tissue vulnerability during reperfusion. Those
   studies where CHD deaths or second occlusions have been
   recorded used large amounts of fish oils, and do not indicate
   whether amounts of omega-3 fatty acids found in the diet would
   have the same effects. Thus, there are many possible avenues
   suom these data about the importance of omega-3 fatty acids in
   reducing the risk of human CHD.
   
   b. Safety concerns
   
   i. Diabetes
   
       Three additional papers (Refs. 170, 222, and 304) and one
   major review (Ref. 238) on the effects of fish oils in
   diabetics were published after the time period reviewed in the
   proposal. All three new studies found increased LDL
   cholesterol after fish oil consumption in type II diabetics.
   However, effects on fasting glucose varied, with no change
   (Ref. 170), a transient increase (Ref. 222) or an increase
   (Ref. 304) reported. Although fasting insulin concentration
   was unchanged after fish oil (Refs. 170 and 304), postprandial
   insulin response usually, but not always (Ref. 170), has been
   reported as reduced (Refs. 238 and 304).
       These effects of fish oils on blood glucose appear to
   depend on the amount of fish oils fed. One study found no
   change in fasting blood glucose levels among type II diabetics
   treated with 3.0 g/day EPA plus DHA for 2 weeks (Ref. 170).
   Two other studies that used 3 or 2.7 g/day EPA plus DHA for 6
   and 8 weeks (Refs. 222 and 79) only found transient increases
   in blood glucose halfway through their respective
   supplementation periods. A fifth study (Ref. 12) that used 3.0
   g/day EPA plus DHA for 3 weeks found comparable increases in
   fasting blood glucose when either fish oil or safflower oil
   was fed, so the increase cannot be attributed specifically to
   the omega-3 fatty acids. Similarly, Vessby and Boberg (Ref.
   157) fed 3 g/day EPA plus DHA and did not find a difference in
   fasting glucose or glycosylated hemoglobin after fish oil
   supplementation compared to baseline; they did find a
   significant difference compared to the olive oil treatment
   that produced changes in the opposite direction from fish
   oil.Studies on type II diabetics that reported increased
   glucose used higher amounts (4.5 to 8 g/day) of omega-3 fatty
   acids (Refs. 52, 55, 128, and 304). Thus, FDA concludes that
   glycemic control among diabetics remains a valid safety
   concern, but notes that restriction of the amount of
   supplemental omega-3 fatty acids may suitably address this
   concern.
   
    ii. Increase in LDL cholesterol
   
       Many studies published after 1987 with data for LDL or
   apoB report increased LDL cholesterol or apoB after fish oils,
   in hypercholesterolemic or hypertriglyceridemic subjects
   (Refs. 1, 26, 32, 55, 60, 61, 63, 73, 75, 94, 114, 119, 120,
   129, 146, and166). Virtually all the studies with 10 or more
   subjects supplemented with 5 g/day EPA plus DHA or more found
   increased LDL. Some studies on normal subjects (all of which
   were reviewed in the proposed rule) also report increased LDL
   or apoB after fish oil consumption (Refs. 54, 127, and 156).
   Many studies that found no effect may not have had sufficient
   sample size to detect a difference due to treatment. FDA
   concludes that increased LDL cholesterol among some
   populations already at increased risk of CHD remains a valid
   safety concern, but because most reports of increased LDL are
   in studies where large amounts of fish oils are given, it is
   possible that restriction of the amount of supplemental
   omega-3 fatty acids and/or changes in the fatty acid
   composition of omega-3 fatty acid supplements may suitably
   address this concern.
   
   III. Overall Summary and Conclusions
   
       FDA concludes that there is some evidence that supports a
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD, but that the
   totality of scientific evidence available at this time does
   not provide an adequate basis for a health claim. In some
   cases, there is not significant scientific agreement that the
   changes that are specific to omega-3 fatty acids will reduce
   the risk of CHD. In other cases, the data do not demonstrate
   that the effect is specifically due to the omega-3 fatty acids
   and not due to other dietary variables. For yet other cases,
   the data are ambiguous because effects of omega-3 fatty acids
   are not consistently observed, which suggests that other
   variables are important in determining whether or not an
   effect is seen. Therefore, the agenc consider the evidence
   sufficiently strong to draw a firm conclusion about the
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and risk of CHD, and
   therefore is not authorizing the claim at this time.
       In the course of developing this regulation, FDA has
   identified some areas where greater agreement is needed that
   the effects produced by omega-3 fatty acids are directly
   related to the risk of CHD. Many surrogate markers have been
   hypothesized, on the basis of limited evidence, to be related
   to specific diseases, including CHD, but few have withstood
   the continued scrutiny of scientific investigation. Also, some
   markers may have scientific validity, but may not be
   applicable for use in the generalpopulation, because of
   technical limitations. Thus, FDA asserts that only when a
   surrogate marker for a disease has been accepted as a risk
   factor for the general population, as indicated by a statement
   by an unbiased, nationally representative authoritative
   scientific or medical body, can the agency authorize a health
   claim based on the relationship of a nutrient to the surrogate
   marker of the disease. Examples of potential surrogate
   measures for which validation is needed are in vitro platelet
   aggregation, in vitro platelet adhesion, elevated fasting
   triglycerides postprandial triglycerides (recently considered
   at the NHLBI consensus development conference, Ref. 255), and
   subfractions of LDL and/or HDL.
       In some cases additional research is needed to determine
   whether hypothesized subpopulations, e.g., those with high
   LDL:HDL ratio and high triglycerides, are at increased risk of
   disease. The pronounced triglyceride lowering effects of
   omega-3 fattyacids might well have a protective effect against
   CHD in such a subpopulation.
       There are other areas where additional research is needed
   to show, for agreed endpoints, that the effects are
   consistently produced, or are specifically due to omega-3
   fatty acids. These areas require additional data to establish
   that the effect of omega-3 fatty acids is specific, or to
   further define the conditions under which omega-3 fatty acids
   have their effects. For example, data are needed to show a
   reduction in MI or CHD mortality among individuals fed
   supplemental omega-3 fatty acids (specifically) compared to a
   group fed omega-6 PUFA's. The critical failing of some recent
   studies associating omega-3 fatty acids and CHD is that
   specificity was not obtained. Future studies should carefully
   control for known confounders, particularly dietaryvariables.
       Finally, the available data suggest that some set of
   conditions or population may exist for which omega-3 fatty
   acids will increase HDL. Additional research should be able to
   define the conditions under which omega-3 fatty acids have
   this effect.
       Interested parties may choose to petition the agency for
   approval of other health claims about omega-3 fatty acids. For
   example, additional data may be developed to support an
   omega-3 fatty acids/hypertension health claim petition.
   Because the bloodpressure-lowering effect of omega-3 fatty
   acids appears most marked against a background of very low
   dietary intakes of omega-3 fatty acids, the role of omega-3
   fatty acids in the total diet would need clarification before
   such a petition could be adequately supported. Similarly,
   limitations of the effects of omega-3 fatty acids on the
   magnitude and duration of change in blood pressure, the
   quantitative amounts of omega-3 fatty acids required for the
   effects, and characterization of the sensitive subpopulation
   would require discussion in a petition. A petition should also
   address apparent conflicting pieces of information, e.g., high
   blood pressure among populations that have high intakes of
   omega-3 fatty acids. Safety concerns raised in this final rule
   will, of course, require resolution prior to the authorization
   of any petitioned claim.
   
   IV. Decision Not to Authorize a Health Claim Relating
   Ingestion of Omega-3 Fatty Acids to Reduced Risk of CHD
   
       In evaluating the scientific evidence, FDA considered: (1)
   The strength of the association of omega-3 fatty acids with
   CHD or surrogate markers for CHD, (2) the consistency of
   findings among the many studies, (3) the specificity of the
   outcome to omega-3 fatty acids, (4) the presence or absence of
   a dose-response relationship, and (5) the biologic
   plausibility of an association. FDA has determined that there
   is inadequate evidence to show that increased consumption of
   omega-3 fatty acids will reduce the risk of CHD.
       FDA sought to determine whether there was significant
   scientific agreement among qualified experts that the totality
   of publicly available scientific evidence supported the claim
   that omega-3 fatty acids reduce the risk of heart disease. FDA
   reviewed the position taken in numerous Federal Government
   reports and other authoritative scientific reports and
   evaluated the publicly available scientific evidence that has
   become available since those reports were written. The
   decision to deny a health claim is based on the conclusions
   reached following review of the following sources of
   information: (1) ``The Surgeon General's Report on Nutrition
   and Health;'' (2) the National Research Council's ``Diet and
   Health: Implications for Reducing Chronic DiseaseRisk,'' and
   (3) the National Cholesterol Education Program's Report of the
   Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High
   Blood Cholesterol in Adults. Each of these reports concluded
   that there was inadequate evidence of a relationship between
   consumption of omega-3 fatty acids and CHD. FDA has reviewed
   again all of the relevant cross-sectional data from which the
   hypothesized relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD
   originated, and all clinical intervention data published since
   these Federal Government and other authoritative reports were
   issued to determine whether the additional evidence is
   adequate to support a health claim for omega-3 fatty acids.
       The LSRO report reached a different conclusion from the
   other authoritative reports by finding a relationship between
   omega-3 fatty acids and CHD. The report used only selected
   evidence, and often did not distinguish effects specifically
   due to omega-3 fatty acids from effects due to PUFA's in
   general. The description of international epidemiologic
   findings of a relationship between fish consumption and CHD,
   similarly, was not shown to be specific to omega-3 fatty
   acids. In some instances, FDA disagreed with the
   interpretation of the studies reviewed by LSRO, or with LSRO's
   conclusions. Finally, the LSRO report also based its
   conclusions about the usefulness of omega-3 fatty acids, in
   part, on changes in blood lipid parameters that are not
   generally agreed to be risk factors for CHD. Therefore, FDA
   finds numerous reasons for not accepting all of the findings
   of the LSRO report. FDA's conclusions regarding the
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD rely instead
   on FDA's independent review of the publicly available
   scientific information, and are consistent with the Federal
   Government and other comprehensive and authoritative reports
   except for the LSRO report.
       The surveys, cross-sectional studies, and nonintervention
   prospective studies do not provide adequate support for a
   relationship between consumption of omega-3 fatty acids and
   CHD. Only a few studies found an association between fish
   intake and CHD,while others have found no association; thus,
   there was no consistency of findings. None of the studies that
   reported a relationship distinguished fish consumption from
   other factors associated with fish consumption, and therefore
   none demonstrates specificity. Even in those studies that
   reported a relationship between fish consumption and CHD, it
   is not clear that the observed effects were due to the omega-3
   fatty acids in fish. Also, the omega-3 fatty acid content of
   the fish diet associated with reduced CHD in these studies was
   so low that the importance of omega-3 fatty acids is
   questionable, thus weakening the biologic plausibility of the
   relationship.
       The data from intervention studies also do not establish a
   relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and risk of CHD. The
   most compelling type of evidence to support a diet-disease
   relationship is a prospective, double-blind,
   placebo-controlled intervention study, with CHD morbidity and
   mortality as endpoints. To date, there is only one such trial
   (Ref. 16). The results of that study showed that increased
   consumption of fish does not reduce the risk of a second heart
   attack but may reduce the risk that the attack will be fatal.
   This study provides evidence for a protective effect of fish
   consumption against second heart attacks. However, as with the
   nonintervention study data, this study did not provide
   evidence to attribute the benefit to omega-3 fatty acid intake
   rather than some other factor associated with fish consumption
   (specificity).
       Less persuasive than prospective studies in which CHD per
   se is measured, but still very useful, are prospective
   clinical trials in which surrogate markers for CHD are
   measured. Recent studies have not found beneficial effects
   from omega-3 fatty acids on total cholesterol or LDL
   cholesterol in normal, healthy persons, or among persons at
   risk for CHD. Numerous studies, including some large or
   multicenter studies, have reported these results,
   demonstrating consistency in the findings and providing the
   agency confidence that they were not spurious. The data on HDL
   cholesterol are ambiguous. There appear to be other factors in
   the dietary interventions besides the omega-3 fatty acids that
   determine whether or not supplementation with fish or fish
   oils raises HDL.
       An increase in bleeding times and a decrease in platelet
   aggregation have been observed frequently, but not always,
   after supplemental omega-3 fatty acids in normal healthy
   individuals as well as in diseased persons. Additionally,
   there is evidence that platelet adhesion is reduced by omega-3
   fatty acids. The effects of decreased platelet aggregation and
   platelet adhesion appear to be related to the intake of
   omega-3 fatty acids in a dose-response relationship. What has
   not been established, however, is that in vitro platelet
   aggregation or platelet adhesion are bona fide surrogate risk
   factors for CHD in the general population.
       Omega-3 fatty acids have been shown to reduce blood
   pressure in hypertensive people to a small degree, which may
   bear on a relationship between omega-3 fatty acids and CHD.
   This effect was not of large magnitude, but it is specific to
   omega-3 fatty acids, it has been reported by a number of
   investigators, a dose response was found, and the effect is
   biologically plausible through at least two mechanisms.
   However, it has not been established that omega-3 fatty acids
   reduce blood pressure in normal subjects (lack of consistency,
   weak effect, absence of dose-response relationship).
   Additionally, it has not been demonstrated that the magnitude
   and duration of changes in blood pressure observed in
   short-term studies will persist during long-term consumption
   of omega-3 fatty acids, or that these changes result in a
   reduced risk of CHD.
       Finally, the potential that omega-3 fatty acids may
   increase LDL cholesterol and/or apoB among diabetics and
   hyperlipidemics, and the potential that omega-3 fatty acids
   may worsen control of blood glucose in diabetics are
   significant safety concernsthat must be addressed before a
   claim may be made that consumption of omega-3 fatty acids by
   the general population will reduce the risk of CHD.
       In conclusion, there are numerous effects of omega-3 fatty
   acids that may be related to the risk of CHD, e.g., reduction
   in fasting and postprandial triglycerides, reductions in
   platelet aggregation and adhesion, changes in the composition
   of lipoproteins. However, at this time these endpoints are not
   generally agreed to be closely related to the risk of CHD. In
   other areas, additional data are needed to show that effects
   related to fish consumption are specifically due to the
   omega-3 fatty acids intion for a health claim relating omega-3
   fatty acids to the risk of CHD.
   
   V. Environmental Impact
   
       The agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.24(a)(11) that
   this action is of a type that does not individually or
   cumulatively have a significant effect on the human
   environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessment
   nor an environmental impact statement is required.
   
   VI. Economic Impact
   
       In its food labeling proposals of November 27, 1991 (56 FR
   60366 et seq.), FDA stated that the food labeling reform
   initiative, taken as a whole, would have associated costs in
   excess of the $100 million threshold that defines a major
   rule. Thus, inaccordance with Executive Order 12291 and the
   Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96 - 354), FDA developed
   one comprehensive regulatory impact analysis (RIA) that
   presented the costs and benefits of all of the food labeling
   provisions taken together. That RIA was published in the
   Federal Register of November 27, 1991 (56 FR 60856), and along
   with the food labeling proposals, the agency requested
   comments on the RIA.
       FDA has evaluated more than 300 comments that it received
   in response to the November 1991 RIA. FDA's discussion of
   these comments is contained in the agency's final RIA
   published elsewhere in this issue of the Federal Register. In
   addition, FDA will prepare a final regulatory flexibility
   analysis (RFA) subsequent to the publication of the food
   labeling final rules. The final RFA will be placed on file
   with the Dockets Management Branch (HFA - 305), Food and Drug
   Administration, rm. 1 - 23, 12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD
   20857, and a notice will be published in the Federal Register
   announcing its availability.
       In the final RIA, FDA has concluded, based on its review
   of available data and comments, that the overall food labeling
   reform initiative constitutes a major rule as defined by
   Executive Order 12291. Further, the agency has concluded that
   although the costs of complying with the new food labeling
   requirements are substantial, such costs are outweighed by the
   public health benefits that will be realized through the use
   of improved nutrition information provided by food labeling.
   
   VII. References
   
       The following references have been placed on display in
   the Dockets Management Branch (address above) and may be seen
   by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday
   through Friday.
   
       1. Abbey, M., P. Clifton, M. Kestin, B. Belling., P.
   Nestel, ``Effect of Fish Oil on Lipoproteins, Lecithin:
   Cholesterol, Acyltransferase, and Lipid Transfer Protein
   Activity in Humans,'' Arteriosclerosis, 10:85 - 94, 1990.
       2. Agren, J. J., O. Hanninen, A. Hanninen, K. Seppanen,
   ``Dose Responses in Platelet Fatty Acid Composition,
   Aggregation, and Prostanoid Metabolism During Moderate
   Freshwater Fish Diet,'' Thrombosis Research, 57:231 - 28,
   1990.
       3. Al-Mahtaseb, N., N. Hayat, M. Al-Khafaji,
   ``Lipoproteins and Apolipoproteins in Young Male Survivors of
   Myocardial Infarction,'' Atherosclerosis, 77:131 - 138, 1989.
       4. Austin, M. A., ``Plasma Triglyceride and Coronary Heart
   Disease,'' Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, 11:1 - 14, 1991.
       5. Azar, R., F. Dequiedt, J. Awada, P. Dequiedt, A.
   Tacquet, ``Effects of Fish Oil Rich in Polyunsaturated Fatty
   Acids on Hyperlipidemia of Hemodialysis Patients,'' Kidney
   International, 36:26 - 27, 1989.
       6. Bach, R., U. Schmidt, F. Jung,H. Kiesewetter, ``Effects
   of Fish Oil Capsules in Two Dosages on Blood Pressure,
   PlateletFunctions, Haemorrheological, and Clinical Chemistry
   Parameters in Apparently Healthy Subjects,'' Annals Nutrition
   Metabolism, 33:359 - 367, 1989.
       7. Bagdade, J. D., W. E. Buchanan, R. A. Levy, P. A.
   Subbaiah, M. C. Ritter, ``Effects of W - 3 Fish Oils on Plasma
   Lipids, Lipoprotein Composition, and Postheparin Lipoprotein
   Lipase in Women with IDDM,'' Diabetes, 39:426 - 431, 1990.
       8. Bang, H. O., J. Dyerberg, ``Lipid Metabolism and
   Ischemic Heart Disease in Greenland Eskimos,'' Advances in
   Nutritional Research, 3:1 - 21, 1986.
       9. Blonk, M. C., H. J. G. Bilo, J. J. P. Nauta, C.
   Popp-Snijders, C. Mulder, A. J. M. Donker, ``Dose-response
   Effects of Fish-oil Supplementation in Healthy Volunteers,''
   American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52:120.
       10. Bonaa, K., ``Epidemiological and Intervention Studies
   on the Effect of Marine Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids on Blood
   Pressure,'' Journal of Internal Medicine Supplement, 225:105 -
   10, 1989.
       11. Bonaa, K. H., K. S. Bjerve, B. Straume, I. T. Gram, D.
   Thelle, ``Effect of Eicosapentaenoic and Docosahexaenoic Acids
   on Blood Pressure in Hypertension,'' New England Journal of
   Medicine, 322:795 - 801, 1990.
       12. Borkman, M., et al., ``Effects of Fish Oil
   Supplementation on Glucose and Lipid Metabolism in NIDDM,''
   Diabetes, 38:1314 - 1319, 1989.
       13. Bowles, M. H., et al., ``EPA in the Prevention of
   Restenosis Post PTCA,'' Angiology--The Journal of Vascular
   Diseases.
       14. Brown, A. J., D. C. Roberts, J. E. Pritchard, A. S.
   Truswell, ``A Mixed Australian Fish Diet and Fish-oil
   Supplementation: Impact on the Plasma Lipid Profile of Healthy
   Men,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52:825 - 833,
   1990.
       15. Brown, A. J., D. C. K. Roberts, ``Moderate Fish Oil
   Intake Improves Lipemic Response to a Standard Fat Meal,''
   Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, 11:457 - 466, 1991.
       16. Burr, M. L., J. F. Gilbert, R. M. Holliday, P. C.
   Elwood, ``Effects of Changes in Fat, Fish, and Fibre Intakes
   on Death and Myocardial Reinfarction: Diet and Reinfarction
   Trial (DART),'' Lancet, ii:757 - 761, 1989.
       17. Childs, M. T., I. B. King, R. H. Knopp, ``Divergent
   Lipoprotein Responses to Fish Oils with Various Ratios of
   Eicosapentaenoic Acid and Docosahexaenoic Acid,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52:632 - 9, 1990.
       18. Clark, W. F., A. Parbtani, M. W. Huff, B. Reid, B. J.
   Holub, P. Faladeau, ``Omega-3 Fatty Acid Dietary
   Supplementation in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus,'' Kidney
   International, 36:653 - 660, 1989.
       19. Clubb, F. J., J. M. Schmitz, M. M. Butler, L. M. Buja,
   J. T. Willerson, W. B. Campbell, ``Effect of Dietary Omega-3
   Fatty Acid on Serum Lipids, Platelet Function, and
   Atherosclerosis in Watanabe Heritable Hyperlipidemic
   Rabbits,'' Arteriosclerosis, 9:529 - 537, 1989.
       20. Cobiac, L., P. M. Clifton, M. Abbey, G. B. Belling, P.
   J. Nestel, ``Lipid, Lipoprotein, and Hemostatic Effects of
   Fish vs. Fish-oil N - 3 Fatty Acids in Mildly Hyperlipidemic
   Males,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 53:1210 -
   1216,1991.
       21. Connor, W. E., S. L. Connor, ``Diet, Atherosclerosis,
   and Fish Oil,'' Advances Internal Medicine, 35:139 - 71, 1990.
       22. Council for Responsible Nutrition, ``Proceedings and
   Conclusions of the Round-table Discussion on Fish Oils and
   Bleeding Time,'' Chester, England, Council for Responsible
   Nutrition, Washington, DC, 1990.
       23. Crombie, I. K., P. McLoone, W. C. S. Smith, M.
   Thomson, H. T. Pedoe, ``International Differences in Coronary
   Heart Disease Mortality and Consumption of Fish and Other
   Foodstuffs,'' European Heart Journal, 8:560 - 563, 1987.
       24. Croset, M., et al., ``Functions and Tocopherol Content
   of Blood Platelets from Elderly People After Low Intake of
   Purified Eicosapentaenoic Acid,'' Thrombosis Research, 57:1 -
   12, 1990.
       25. Curb, J. D., D. M. Reed, ``Fish Consumption and
   Mortality from Coronary Heart Disease,'' New England Journal
   of Medicine, 313:821, 1985.
       26. Dart, A. M., R. A. Riemersma, M. F. Oliver, ``Effects
   of Maxepa on Serum Lipids in Hypercholesterolemic Subjects,
   Atherosclerosis, 80:119 - 124, 1989.
       27. Davis, H. R., R. T. Bridenstine, D. Vesselinovitch, R.
   W. Wissler, ``Fish Oil Inhibits Development of Atherosclerosis
   in Rhesus Monkeys,'' Arterio Sclerosis, 7:441 - 449, 1987.
       28. DeCaterina, R., et al., ``Vascular Prostacyclin is
   Increased in Patients Ingesting Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty
   Acids Before Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery,''
   Circulation, 82:428 - 438, 1990.
       29. Deck, C., K. Radack, ``Effects of Modest Doses of
   Omega-3 Fatty Acids on Lipids and Lipoproteins in
   Hypertriglyceridemic Subjects, a Randomized Controlled
   Trial,'' Archives of Internal Medicine, 149:1857 - 1862, 1989.
       30. Dehmer, G. J., J. J. Popma, E. K. Van Den Berg, E. J.
   Eichhorn, ``Reduction in the Rate of Early Restenosis After
   Coronary Angioplasty by a Diet Supplemented with N - 3 Fatty
   Acids,'' New England Journal of Medicine, 319:733 - 740, 1988.
       31. DeLany, J. P., V. M. Vivian, J. T. Snook, P. A.
   Anderson, ``Effects of Fish Oil on Serum Lipids in Men During
   a Controlled Feeding Trial,'' American Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 52:477 - 485, 1990.
       32. Demke, D. M., G. R. Peters, O. I. Linet, C. M.
   Metzler, K. A. Klott, ``Effects of a Fish Oil Concentrate in
   Patients with Hypercholesterolemia,'' Atherosclerosis, 70:73 -
   80, 1988.
       33. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Public
   Health Service (PHS), ``The International Classification of
   Diseases, 9th Revision,'' DHHS, Washington, DC, 1980.
       34. DHHS, PHS, ``The Surgeon General's Report on Nutrition
   and Health,'' DHHS, Washington, DC, 1988.
       35. DHHS, National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP):
   Report of the Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and
   Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults, DHHS,
   Washington, DC, 1989.
       36. DHHS, National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP):
   Population Panel Report, DHHS, Washington, DC, 1990.
       37. DHHS, PHS, ``Healthy People 2000 National Health
   Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives,'' DHHS,
   Washington, DC, 1990.
       38. Dolecek, T. A., G. Grandits, ``Dietary Polyunsaturated
   Fatty Acids and Mortality in the Multiple Risk Factor
   Intervention Trial,'' World Review Nutrition Dietetics, 66:205
   - 216, 1991.
       39. Dyerberg, J., H. O. Bang, ``A Hypothesis on the
   Development of Acute Myocardial Infarction in Greenlanders,''
   Scandinavian Journal of Clinical and Laboratory Investigation,
   42:7, 1982.
       40. Emeis, J. J., A. C. Houwelingen, C. M. Hoogen, G.
   Hornstra, ``A Moderate Fish Intake Increases Plasminogen
   Activator Inhibitor Type-1 in Human Volunteers,'' Blood,
   74:233 - 237, 1989.
       41. Endres, S., et al., ``The Effect of Dietary
   Supplementation With N - 3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids on the
   Synthesis of Interleukin-1 and Tumor Necrosis Factor by
   Mononuclear Cells,'' New England Journal of Medicine, 320:265
   - 271, 1989.
       42. Ernst, E., ``Effects of N - 3 Fatty Acids on Blood
   Rheology,'' Journal of Internal Medicine, 225:129 - 132, 1989.
       43. Failor, R. A., M. T. Childs, E. L. Bierman, ``The
   Effects of W3 and W6 Fatty Acid-enriched Diets on Plasma
   Lipoproteins and Apoproteins in Familial Combined
   Hyperlipidemia,'' Metabolism, 11:1021 - 1028, 1988.
       44. Fasching, P., K. Ratheiser, W. Waldhausl, M. Rohac,
   ``Metabolic Effects of Fish-oil Supplementation in Patients
   with Impaired Glucose Tolerance,'' Diabetes, 40:583 - 589,
   1991.
       45. FDA, Taylor J. M., letter to J. D. Cordaro, June 1,
   1988.
       46. FDA, Chesemore R. G., letter to R. William Soller,
   Ph.D., June 20, 1990.
       47. Fincham, J. E., et al., ``Chronic Effects of Fish Oil
   and a Therapeutic Diet in Nonhuman Primates,''
   Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, 11:719 - 732, 1991.
       48. Fisher, M., et al., ``Dietary N - 3 Fatty Acid
   Supplementation Reduces Superoxide Production and
   Chemiluminescence in a Monocyte-enriched Preparation of
   Leukocytes,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 51:804 -
   808, 1990.
       49. Flaten, H., et al., ``Fish-oil Concentrate: Effects on
   Variables Related to Cardiovascular Disease,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52:300 - 306, 1990.
       50. Fox, P. L., P. E. Di Corleto, ``Fish Oils Inhibit
   Endothial Cell Production of Platelet-devised Growth
   Factor-like Protein,'' Science, 241:453 - 456, 1988.
       51. Foxall, T. L., G. T. Shwaery, ``Effects of Dietary
   Fish Oil and Butterfat on Serum Lipids and Monocyte and
   Platelet Interactions with Aortic Endothelial Cells,''
   Atherosclerosis, 80:171 - 179, 1990.
       52. Friday, K. E., et al., ``Elevated Plasma Glucose and
   Lowered Triglyceride Levels from Omega-3 Fatty Acid
   Supplementation in Type II Diabetics,'' Diabetes Care, 12:276
   - 281, 1989.
       53. Friday, K. E., R. A. Failor, M. T. Childs, E. L.
   Bierman, ``Effects of N - 3 and N - 6 Fatty Acid-enriched
   Diets on Plasma Lipoproteins and Apolipoproteins in
   Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia,'' Arteriosclerosis
   and Thrombosis, 11:47 - 54, 1991.
       54. Fumeron, F., et al., ``N - 3 Polyunsaturated Fatty
   Acids Raise Low-Density Lipoproteins, High-Density Lipoprotein
   2, and Plasminogen - activator Inhibitor in Health Young
   Men,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 54:118 - 122,
   1991.
       55. Glauber, H., P. Wallace, K. Griver, G. Brechtel,
   ``Adverse Metabolic Effect of Omega-3 Fatty Acids in
   Non-insulin-dependentDiabetes Mellitus,'' Annals of Internal
   Medicine, 108:663 - 668, 1988.
       56. Grigg, L. E., et al., ``Determinants of Ecstenosis and
   Lack of Effect of Dietary Supplementation with
   Eicosapentaenoic Acid on the Incidence of Coronary Artery
   Restenosis After Angioplasty,'' Journal of American College
   Cardiology, 13:6659667, 1989.
       57. Haglund, O., R. Wallin, R. Luostarinen, T. Saldeen,
   ``Effects of a New Fluid Fish Oil Concentrate, ESKIMO - 3, on
   Triglycerides, Cholesterol, Fibrinogen and Blood Pressure,''
   Journal of Internal Medicine, 227:347 - 53, 1990.
       58. Hardarson, T., et al., ``Cod Liver Oil Does Not Reduce
   Ventricular Extrasystoles after Myocardial Infarction,''
   Journal of Internal Medicine, 226:33 - 37, 1989.
       59. Harris, W. S., W. E. Connor, N. Alam, D. R.
   Illingworth, ``Reduction of Postprandial Triglyceridemia in
   Humans by Dietary N - 3 Fatty Acids,'' Journal of Lipid
   Research, 29:1451 - 1460, 1988.
       60. Harris, W. S., C. A. Dujovne, M. Zucker, B. Johnson,
   ``Effects of Low Saturated Fat, Low Cholesterol Fish Oil
   Supplement in Hypertriglyceridemic Patients,'' Annals of
   Internal Medicine, 109:465 - 470, 1988.
       61. Harris, W. S., M. L. Zucker, C. A. Dujovne, ``W - 3
   Fatty Acids in Hypertriglyceridemic Patients: Triglycerides vs
   Methyl Esters,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
   48:992 - 997, 1988.
       62. Harris, W. S., ``Fish Oils and Plasma Lipid and
   Lipoprotein Metabolism in Humans: A Critical Review,'' Journal
   of Lipid Research, 30:785 - 807, 1989.
       63. Harris, W. S., et al., ``Fish Oils in
   Hypertriglyceridemia: A Dose-response Study,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 51:399 - 406, 1990.
       64. Harris, W. S., S. Silveira, C. A. Dujovne, ``Combined
   Treatment with Fish Oils and Aspirin Affects Bleeding Times
   and Platelet Function,'' World Reviews of Nutrition and
   Dietetics, 66:530, 1991.
       65. Hearn, J. A., D. S. Sgoutas, K. A. Robinson, S. B.
   King, R. J. Siegel, G. S. Roubin, ``Marine Lipid Concentrate
   and Atherosclerosis in the Rabbit Model,'' Atherosclerosis,
   75:39 - 47, 1989.
       66. Hennekens, C. H., J. E. Buring, P. Sandercock, R.
   Collins, R. Peto, ``Aspirin and Other Antiplatelet Agents in
   the Secondary and Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular
   Disease,'' Circulation, 80:749 - 756, 1989.
       67. Herold, P. M., J. E. Kinsella, ``Fish Oil Consumption
   and Decreased Risk of Cardiovascular Disease: A Comparison of
   Findings from Animal and Human Feedingtrials,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 43:566 - 598, 1986.
       68. Hirai, A., et al., ``Eicosapentaenoic Acid and
   Platelet Function in Japanese,'' Lancet, ii:1132, 1980.
       69. Hollander, et al., 1987 [to be added].
       70. Holub, B. J., ``Dietary Fish Oils Containing
   Eicosapentaenoic Acid and the Prevention of Atherosclerosis
   and Thrombosis,'' Canadian Medical Association Journal,
   139:377 - 381, 1988.
       71. Hostmark, A., T. Bjerkedal, P. Kierulf, H. Flaten, K.
   Ulshagen, ``Fish Oil and Plasma Fibrinogen,'' British Medical
   Journal, 297:180 - 181, 1988.
       72. Hsia, M. T. S., R. D. Mavis, J. M. DeSesso, ``Health
   Effects of Refined Menhaden Oil Mitre Corporation, McLean VA,
   1989.
       73. Hughes, G. S., et al., ``Fish Oil Produces and
   Atherogenic Lipid Profile in Hypertensive Men,''
   Atheroselerosis, 84:227 - 237, 1990.
       74. Hunter, D. J., I. Kazda, A. Chockalingam, J. G. Fodor,
   ``Fish Consumption and Cardiovascular Mortality in Canada: An
   Inter-regional Comparison,''  American Journal Preventive
   Medicine, 4:5 - 10, 1988.
       75. Inagaki, M., W. S. Harris, ``Changes in Lipoprotein
   Composition in Hypertriglyceridemic Patients Taking
   Cholesterol-free Fish Oil Supplements,'' Atherosclerosis,
   82:237 - 246, 1990.
       76. Iso, H., et al.,``Serum Fatty Acids and Fish Intake in
   Rural Japanese, Urban Japanese, Japanese American and
   Caucasian American Men,'' Internal Journal of Epidemiology,
   18:374 - 81, 1989.
       77. Jenson, T., S. Stender, K. Goldstein, G. Holmer, T.
   Deckert, ``Partial Normalization by Dietary Cod-liver Oil of
   Increased Microvascular Albumin Leakage in Patients with
   Insulin-dependent Diabetes and Albuminuria, New England
   Journal of Medicine, 321:1572 - 1577, 1989.
       78. Kagawa, Y., et al., ``Eicosapolyenoic Acids of Serum
   Lipids of Japanese Islanders with Low Incidence of
   Cardiovascular Diseases,'' Journal Nutritional Sciences and
   Vitaminology, 28:441 - 453, 1982.
       79. Kusion, S. E., et al., ``Effect of Omega-3 Fish Oils
   on Lipid Metabolism Glycemic Control and Blood Pressure in
   Type II Diabetic Patients,'' Journal of Clinical Endocrinology
   and Metabolism, 67:5, 1988.
       80. Kestin, M., P. Clifton, G. B. Belling, P. J. Nestel,
   ``N - 3 Fatty Acids of Marine Origin Lower Systolic Blood
   Pressure and Triglycerides but Raise LDL Cholesterol Compared
   with N - 3 and N - 6 Fatty Acids From Plants,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 51:1028 - 1034, 1990.
       81. Kim, D. N., H. T. Ho, D. A. Lawrence, J. Schmee, W. A.
   Thomas, ``Modification of Lipoprotein Patterns and Retardation
   of Atherogenesis by a Fish Oil Supplement to a Hyperlipidemic
   Diet for Swine,'' Atherosclerosis, 76:35 - 54, 1989.
       82. Kinsella, J. E., B. Lokesh, R. A. Stone, ``Dietary N -
   3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Amelioration of
   Cardiovascular Disease: Possible Mechanisms,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52:1 - 28, 1990.
       83. Klasing, S. A., S. M. Pilch, ``Review of the
   Epidemiological and Clinical Evidence on the Role of Omega-3
   Fatty Acids in Health and Disease,'' LSRO, Rockville, MD,
   1986.
       84. Knapp, H. R., ``Polyunsaturates, Endogenous
   Eicosanoids, and Cardiovascular Disease,'' Journal of the
   American College of Nutrition, 9:344 - 351, 1990.
       85. Knapp, H. R., G. A. FitzGerald, ``The Antihypertensive
   Effects of Fish Oil,'' New England Journal of Medicine,
   320:1037 - 1043, 1989.
       86. Kristensen, S. D., E. B. Schmidt, J. Dyerberb,
   ``Dietary Supplementation withN - 3 Polyunsaturated Fatty
   Acids and Human Platelet Function: A Review with Particular
   Emphasis on Implications for Cardiovascular Disease,'' Journal
   Internal Medicine Supplement, 225:141 - 150, 1989.
       87. Kromhout, D., E. B. Bosschieter, C. Coulander, ``The
   Inverse Relation Between Fish Consumption and 20-year
   Mortality From Coronary Heart Disease,'' New England Journal
   of Medicine, 312:1205 - 1209, 1985.
       88. Kromhout, D., ``N - 3 Fatty Acids and Coronary Heart
   Disease: Epidemiology from Eskimos to Western Populations,''
   Journal Internal Medicine Supplement, 225:47 - 51, 1989.
       89. Lands, W. E., ``N - 3 Fatty Acids as Precursors for
   Active Metabolic Substances: Dissonance Between Expected and
   Observed Events,'' Journal of Intern Medicine Supplement,
   225:11 - 20, 1989.
       90. Landymore, R. W., M. MacAulay, B. Sheridan, C.
   Cameron, ``Comparison of Cod-liver Oil and
   Aspirin-dipyridamole for the Prevention of intimal Hyperplasia
   in Autologous Vein Grafts,'' Annals of Thoracic Surgery, 41:54
   - 57, 1986.
       91. Leaf, A., P. C. Weber, ``Cardiovascular Effects of N -
   3 Fatty Acids,'' New England Journal of Medicine, 318:549 -
   557, 1988.
       92. Lehtonen, A., I. Raiha, R. Puumalainen, A. Seppanen,
   J. Marniemi, ``The Effect of the Short-term Administration of
   Fish Oil on Serum Lipoproteins in Old People,'' Gerontology,
   35:311 - 314, 1989.
       93. Lempert, K. D., J. S. Rogers, M. J. Albrink, ``Effects
   of Dietary Fish Oil on Serum Lipids and Blood Coagulation in
   Peritoneal Dialysis Patients,'' American Journal of Kidney
   Diseases, 11:170 - 175, 1988.
       94. Levine, P. H., et al., ``Dietary Supplementation with
   Omega-3 Fatty Acids Prolongs Platelet Survival in
   Hyperlipidemic Patients with Atherosclerosis,'' Archives
   Internal Medicine, 149:1113 - 1116, 1989.
       95. Levinson, P. D., A. H. Iosiphidis, A. L. Saritelli, P.
   N. Herbert, M. Steiner, ``Effects of N - 3 Fatty Acids in
   Essential Hypertension,'' American Journal of Hypertension,
   3:754 - 760, 1990.
       96. Li, X., Steiner, M., ``Fish Oil: A Potent Inhibitor of
   Platelet Adhesiveness,'' Blood, 76:938 - 945, 1990.
       97. Lichtenstein, A. H., A. V. Chobanian, ``Effect of Fish
   Oil on Atherogenesis in Watanabe Heritable Hyperlipidemic
   Rabbit,'' Arteriosclerosis, 10:597 - 606, 1990.
       98. Lox, C. D., ``The Effects of Dietary Marine Fish Oils
   (Omega-3 Fatty Acids) on Coagulation Profiles in Men,''
   General Pharmacology, 21:241 - 6, 1990.
       99. Lox, C. D., ``Effects of Marine Fish Oil (Omega-3
   Fatty Acids) on Lipid Profiles in Women,'' General
   Pharmacology, 21:295 - 8, 1990.
       100. LSRO, ``Cardiovascular Effects from Omega-3 Fatty
   Acids,'' Federation of American Societies for Experimental
   Biology, Rockville, MD, 1991.
       101. Margolin, G., et al., ``Blood Pressure Lowering in
   Elderly Subjects: a Double-blind Crossover Study ofW - 3 and W
   - 6 Fatty Acids,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
   53:562 - 572, 1991.
       102. Meade, T. W., et al., ``Haemostatic Function and
   Ischaemic Heart Disease: Principle Results of the Northwick
   Park Heart Study,'' Lancet, ii:533 - 537, 1986.
       103. Mehta, J. L., L. M. Lopez, D. Lawson, T. J.
   Wargovich, L. L. Williams, ``Dietary Supplementation with
   Omega-3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Patients with Stable
   Coronary Heart Disease,'' American Journal of Medicine, 84:45
   - 52, 1988.
       104. Mehta, J., D. Lawson, T. Saldeen, ``Reduction in
   Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1 (PAI - 1) with Omega-3
   Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid (PUFA) Intake,'' American Heart
   Journal, 116:1201 - 1206, 1988.
       105. Miller, J. P., et al., ``Triglyceride Lowering Effect
   of MaxEPA FishLipid Concentrate: A Multicentre Placebo
   Controlled Double Blind Study,'' Clinical Chemical Action,
   178:251 - 260, 1988.
       106. Milner, M. R., et al., ``Usefulness of Fish Oil
   Supplements in Preventing Clinical Evidence of Restenosis
   After Percutaneous Transluminal Coronary Angioplasty,''
   American Journal of Cardiology, 64:294 - 299, 1989.
       107. Mo.4lgaard, J., H. Von Schenck, C. Lassvik, T. Kuusi,
   A. G. Olsson, ``Effect of Fish Oil Treatment on Plasma
   Lipoproteins in Type III Hyperlipoproteinaemia,''
   Atherosclerosis, 81:1 - 9, 1990.
       108. Mori, T. A., R. Vandongen, J. R. L. Masarei, D.
   Dunbar, K. G. Stanton, ``Serum Lipids in Insulin-dependent
   Diabetics are Markedly Altered by Dietary Fish Oils,''
   Clinical Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology, 15:333 -
   337, 1988.
       109. Mori, T. A., R. Vandongen, J. R. L. Masarei, K. G.
   Stanton, D. Dunbar, ``Dietary Fish Oils Increase Serum Lipids
   in Insulin-dependent Diabetics Compared with Healthy
   Controls,'' Metabolism, 38:404 - 409, 1989.
       110. Mori, T. A., R. Vandongen, J. R. Masarei, ``Fish
   Oil-induced Changes in Apolipoproteins in IDDM Subjects,''
   Diabetes Care, 13:725 - 732, 1990.
       111. Nestel, P. J., ``Effects of N - 3 Fatty Acids on
   Lipid Metabolism,'' Annual Reviews of Nutrition, 10:149 - 67,
   1990.
       112. Nordoy, A., S. H. Goodnight, ``Dietary Lipids and
   Thrombosis,'' Arteriosclerosis, 10:149 - 163, 1990.
       113. Norell, S. E., et al., ``Fish Consumption and
   Mortality from Coronary Heart Disease,'' British Medical
   Journal, 293:426, 1985.
       114. Nozaki, S., A. Garg, G. L. Vega, S. M. Grundy,
   ``Postheparin Lipolytic Activity and Plasma Lipoprotein
   Response to W - 3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Patients with
   Primary Hypertriglyceridemia,'' American Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 53:638 - 642, 1991.
       115. National Research Council/National Academy of
   Science, National Research Council/National Academy of
   Sciences, Diet and Health, Implications for Reducing Chronic
   Disease Risk, National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1989.
       116. Parks, J. S., J. Kaduck-Sawyer, B. C. Bullock, L. L.
   Rudel, ``Effect of Dietary Fish Oil on Coronary Artery and
   Aortic Atherosclerosis in African Green Monkeys,''
   Arteriosclerosis, 10:1102 - 1112, 1990.
       117. Radack, K., C. Deck, G. Huster, ``Dietary
   Supplementation with Low-dose Fish Oils Lowers Fibringen
   Levels: A Randomized, Double-blind Controlled Study,'' Annals
   of Internal Medicine, 111:757 - 758, 1989.
       118. Radack, K., C. Deck, G. Huster, ``The Comparative
   Effects of N - 3 and N - 6 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids on
   Plasma Fibrinogen Levels: A Controlled Clinical Trial in
   Hypertriglyceridemic Subjects,'' Journal American College
   Nutrition, 9:352 - 357, 1990.
       119. Radack, K. L., C. C. Deck, G. A. Huster, ``N - 3
   Fatty Acid Effects on Lipids, Lipoproteins, and
   Apolipoproteins at Very Low Doses: Results of a Randomized
   Controlled Trial in Hypertriglyceridemic Subjects,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 51:599 - 605, 1990.
       120. Reis, G. J., et al., ``Effects of Two Types of Fish
   Oil Supplements on Serum Lipids and Plasma Phospholipid Fatty
   Acids in Coronary Artery Disease,'' American Journal of
   Cardiology, 66:1171 - 1175, 1990.
       121. Reis, G. J., et al., ``Randomized Trial of Fish Oil
   for Prevention of Restenosis After Coronary Angioplasty,''
   Lancet, ii:177 - 181, 1989.
       122. Rich et al., 1987 [to be added].
       123. Rich, S., et al., ``Development of Atherosclerosis in
   Genetically Hyperlipidmic Rabbits During Chronic Fish-oil
   Ingestion,'' Arteriosclerosis, 9:189 - 194, 1989.
       124. Rillaerts, E. G., G. J. Engelmann, K. M. Van Camp, I.
   De Leeuw, ``Effect of Omega-3 Fatty Acids in Diet of Type I
   Diabetic Subjects on Lipid Values and Hemorheological
   Parameters,'' Diabetes, 38:1412 - 1416, 1989.
       125. Rodgers, R. P. C., J. Levin, ``A Critical Reappraisal
   of the Bleeding Time,'' Seminars in Thrombosis and Hemostasis,
   16:1 - 20, 1990.
       126. Rogers, K. A., M. J. Karnovsky, ``Dietary Fish Oil
   Enhances Monocyte Adhesion and Fatty Streak Formation in the
   Hypercholesterolemic Rat,'' American Journal of Pathology,
   132:382 - 388, 1988.
       127. Sanders, T. A., A. Hinds, C. C. Pereira, ``Effects of
   Dietary Fish Oil on Blood Lipids in Normal Subjects,'' Journal
   of Internal Medicine Supplement, 225:99 - 104, 1989.
       128. Schectman, G., S. Kaul, A. H. Kissebah, ``Effect of
   Fish Oil Concentrate on Lipoprotein Composition in NIDDM,''
   Diabetes, 37:1567 - 1573, 1988.
       129. Schectman, G., S. Kaul, A. H. Kissebah,
   ``Heterogeneity of Low Density Lipoprotein Responses to
   Fish-oil Supplementation in Hypertriglyceridemic Subjects,''
   Arteriosclerosis, 9:345 - 354, 1989.
       130. Schectman, G., S. Kaul, G. D. Cherayil, M. Lee, A.
   Kissebah, ``Can the Hypotriglyceridemic Effect of Fish Oil
   Concentrate Be Sustained?'', Annals of Internal Medicine,
   110:346 - 352, 1989.
       131. Schmidt, E. B., S. D. Kristensen, J. Dyerberg, ``The
   Effect of Fish Oil on Lipids, Coagulation and Fibrinolysis in
   Patients with Angina Pectoris,'' Artery, 15:316 - 329, 1988.
       132. Schmidt, E. B., S. D. Kristensen, P. J. Sorensen, J.
   Dyerberg, ``Antithrombin III and Protein C in Stable Angina
   Pectoris-influence of Dietary Supplementation with
   Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids,'' Scandinavian Journal Clinical
   Laboratory Investi
       133. Schmidt, E. B., E. Ernst, K. Varming, J. O. Pederson,
   J. Dyerberg, ``The Effect of N - 3 Fatty Acids on Lipids and
   Haemostasis in Patients with Type IIa and Type IV
   Hyperlipidemia,'' Thrombosis and Haemostasis, 62:797 - 801,
   1989.
       134. Schmidt, E. B., et al., ``The Effects of N - 3
   Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids on Lipids, Haemostasis, Neutrophil
   and Monocyte Chemotaxis in Insulin-dependent Diabetes
   Mellitus,'' Journal of Internal Medicine, 225:201 - 206, 1989.
       135. Schmidt, E. B., J. O. Pederson, S. Ekelund, N.
   Grunnet, C. Jersild,J. Dyerberg, ``Cod Liver Oil Inhibits
   Neurtophil and Monocyte Chemotaxis in Healthy Males,''
   Atherosclerosis, 77:53 - 57, 1989.
       136. Schmidt, E. B., J. O. Pederson,K. Varming, E. Ernst,
   ``N - 3 Fatty Acids andLeukocyte Chemotaxis--Effects in
   Hyperlipidemia and Dose-response Studies in Healthy Men,''
   Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, 11:429 - 435, 1991.
       137. Shekelle, R. B., et al., ``Fish Consumption and
   Mortality from Coronary Heart Disease,'' New England Journal
   of Medicine, 313:820, 1985.
       138. Shimokawa, H., P. M. Vanhoutte, ``Dietary Omega-3
   Fatty Acids and Endothelium-dependent Relaxations in Porcine
   Coronary Arteries,'' American Journal of Physiology, 256:H968
   - H973, 1988.
       139. Silverman, D. I., J. A. Ware, F. M. Sacks, R. C.
   Pasternak, ``Comparison of the Absorption and Effect on
   Platelet Function of a Single Dose of N - 3 Fatty Acids Given
   as Fish or Fish Oil,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
   53:116591170, 1991.
       140. Simons, L. A., A. Parfitt, J. Simons, S.
   Balasubramaniam, ``Effects of an Ethyl Ester Preparation of
   Fish Oils (Himega) on Lipids and Lipoproteins in
   Hyperlipidaemia,'' Australia New Zealand Journal Medicine,
   20:689 - 694, 1990.
       141. Simonsen, T., A. Vartun, V. Lyngmo, A. Nordoy,
   ``Coronary Heart Disease, Serum Lipids, Platelets, and Dietary
   Fish Consumption in Two Communities in Northern Norway,'' Acta
   Medica Scandinavica, 222:237 - 245, 1987.
       142. Simonsen, T., A. Nordoy, C. Sjunneskog, V. Lyngmo,
   ``The Effects of Cod Liver Oil in Two Populations with Low and
   High Intake of Dietary Fish,'' Acta Medica Scandinavica,
   223:491 - 498, 1988.
       143. Skeaff, C. M., B. J. Holub, ``The Effect of Fish Oil
   Consumption on Platelet Aggregation Responses in Washed Human
   Platelet Suspensions,'' Thrombosis Research, 51:105 - 115,
   1988.
       144. Smith, P., H. Arnesen, T. Opstad, K. H. Dahl, J.
   Eritsland, ``Influence of Highly Concentrated N - 3 Fatty
   Acids on Serum Lipids and Hemostatic Variables in Survivors of
   Myocardial Infarction Receiving Either Oral Anticoagulants or
   Matching Placebo,'' Thrombosis Research, 53:467 - 474, 1989.
       145. Solomon, S. A., et al., ``A Placebo-controlled,
   Double Blind Study of Eicosapentaenoic Acid-rich Oil in
   Patients with Stable Angina Pectoris,'' Current Medical
   Research and Opinion, 12:1 - 11, 1990.
       146. Stacpoole, P. W., J. Alig, L. Ammon, S. E. Crockett,
   ``Dose-response Effects of Dietary Marine Oil on Carbohydrate
   and Lipid Metabolism in Normal Subjects and Patients with
   Hypertriglyceridemia,'' Metabolism, 38:946 - 56, 1989.
       147. Steiner, A., et al., ``Effect of Fish Oil on Blood
   Pressure and Serum Lipids in Hypertension and
   Hyperlipidaemia,'' Journal Hypertension Supplement, 7:S73 -
   76, 1989.
       148. Subbaiah, P. V., M. H. Davidson, M. C. Ritter,
   ``Effects of Dietary Supplementation with Marine Lipid
   Concentrate on the Plasma Lipoprotein Composition of
   Hypercholesterolemic Patients,'' Atherosclerosis, 79:157 -
   166, 1989.
       149. Sweny, P., et al., ``Dietary Fish Oil Supplements
   Preserve Renal Function in Renal Transplant Recipients with
   Chronic Vascular Rejection,'' Nephrology Dialysis
   Transplantation, 4:1070 - 1075, 1989
       150. Takimoto, G., J. Galang, G. K. Lee, B. A. Bradlow,
   ``Plasma Fibrinolytic Activity After Ingestion of Omega-3
   Fatty Acids in Human Subjects,'' Thrombosis Research, 54:573 -
   82, 1989.
       151. Thiery, J., D. Seidel, ``Fish Oil Feeding Results in
   an Enhancement of Cholesterol-induced Atherosclerosis in
   Rabbits,'' Atherosclerosis, 63:53 - 58, 1987.
       152. Trip, M. D., V. M. Cats, E. J. L. Van Capelle, J.
   Vreeken, ``Platelet Hyperreactivity and Prognosis in Survivors
   of Myocardial Infarction,'' New England Journal of Medicine,
   322:1549 - 1554, 1990.
       153. Urakaze, M., T. Hamazaki, H. Kashiwabara, K. Omori,
   ``Favorable Effects of Fish Oil Concentrate on Risk Factors
   for Thrombosis in Renal Allograft Recipients,'' Nephron,
   53:102 - 109, 1989.
       154. Vacek, J. L., W. S. Harris, K. Haffey, ``Short-term
   Effects of Omega-3 Fatty Acids on Exercise Stress Test
   Parameters, Angina and Lipoproteins,'' Biomedicine
   Pharmacotherapeutics, 43:375 - 379, 1989.
       155. Valdini et al. [to be added].
       156. Van Houwelingen, R., H. Zevenbergen, P. Groot, A.
   Kester, G. Hornstra, ``Dietary-fish Effects on Serum Lipids
   and Apolipoproteins, a Controlled Study,'' American Journal of
   Clinical Nutrition, 51:393 - 398, 1990.
       157. Vessby, B., M. Boberg, ``Dietary Supplementation with
   N - 3 Fatty Acids May Impair Glucose Homeostasis in Patients
   with Non-insulin-dependent Diabetes Mellitus,'' Journal of
   Internal Medicine, 228:165 - 171, 1990.
       158. Vollset, S. E., I. Heuch, E. Bjelke, ``Fish
   Consumption and Mortality from Coronary Heart Disease,'' New
   England Journal of Medicine, 313:820, 1985.
       159. Von Schacky, C., ``Prophylaxis of Atherosclerosis
   with Marine Omega-3 Fatty Acids,'' Annals of Internal
   Medicine, 107:890 - 899, 1987.
       160. Wahlqvist, M. L., C. S. Lo, K. A. Myers, ``Fish
   Intake and Aterial Wall Characteristics in Healthy People and
   Diabetic Patients,'' Lancet, 944 - 946, 1989.
       161. Weber, P. C., ``Clinical Studies on the Effects of N
   - 3 Fatty Acids on Cells and Eicosanoids in the Cardiovascular
   System,'' Journal of Internal Medicine Supplement, 225:61 -
   68, 1989.
       162. Weber, P. C., A. Leaf, ``Cardiovascular Effects of W3
   Fatty Acids,'' World Review of Nutrition Dietetics, 66:218 -
   232, 1991.
       163. Weintraub, M. S., R. Zechner, A. Brown, S. Eisenberg,
   J. L. Breslow, ``Dietary Polyunsaturated Fats of the W - 6 and
   W - 3 Series Reduce Postprandial Lipoprotein Levels,'' Journal
   of Clinical Investigation, 82:1884 - 1893, 1988.
       164. Wilt, T. J., et al., ``Fish Oil Supplementation Does
   Not Lower Plasma Cholesterol in Men with
   Hypercholesterolemia,'' Annals of Internal Medicine, 111:900 -
   905, 1989.
       165. Zhu, B - Q., D. L. Smith, R. E. Sievers, W. M.
   Isenberg, W. W. Parmley, ``Inhibition of Atherosclerosis by
   Fish Oil in Cholesterol-fed Rabbits,'' Journal of American
   College of Cardiology, 12:1073 - 1078, 1988.
       166. Zucker, M. L., D. S. Bilyeu, G. M. Helmkamp, W. S.
   Harris, C. A. Dujovne, ``Effects of Dietary Fish Oil on
   Platelet Function and Plasma Lipids in Hyperlipoprotenemic and
   Normal Subjects,'' Atherosclerosis, 73:13 - 22, 1988.
       167. Beswick, A. D., A. M. Fehily, D. S. Sharp, S. Renaud,
   and J. Giddings, ``Long-Term Diet Modification and Platelet
   Activity,'' Journal of Internal Medicine, 229, 511 - 515,
   1991.
       168. Agren, J. J., O. Hanninen, M. Laitinen, K. Seppanen,
   I. Bernhardt, L. Fogelholm, J. Herranen, and I. Penttila,
   ``Boreal Freshwater Fish Diet Modifies the Plasma Lipids and
   Prostanoids and Membrane Fatty Acids in Man,'' Lipids, 23, 924
   - 929, 1988.
       169. American Heart Association, ``Heart and Stroke
   Facts,'' 1992.
       170. Annuzzi, G., A. Rivellese, B. Capaldo, L. Di Marino,
   C. Iovine, G. Marotta, and G. Riccardi, ``A Controlled Study
   on the Effects of N - 3 Fatty Acids on Lipid and Glucose
   Metabolism in Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabetic Patients,''
   Atherosclerosis, 87, 65 - 73, 1991.
       171. Austin, M. A., M. C. King, K. M. Vranizan, and R. M.
   Krauss, ``Atherogenic Lipoprotein Phenotype A Proposed Genetic
   Marker for Coronary Heart Disease Risk,'' Circulation, 82, 495
   - 506, 1990.
       172. Bairati, I., L. Roy, and F. Meyer, ``Double-Blind,
   Randomized, Controlled Trial of Fish Oil Supplements in
   Prevention of Recurrence of Stenosis After Coronary
   Angioplasty,'' Circulation, 85, 950 - 956, 1992.
       173. Bairati, I., L. Roy, and F. Meyer, ``Effects of a
   Fish Oil Supplement on Blood Pressure and Serum Lipids in
   Patients Treated for Coronary Artery Disease,'' Canadian
   Journal of Cardiology, 8, 41 - 46, 1992.
       174. Beil, F. U., W. Terres, M. Orgass, and H. Greten,
   ``Dietary Fish Oil Lowers Lipoprotein(a) in Primary
   Hypertriglyceridemia,'' Atherosclerosis, 90, 95 - 97, 1991.
       175. Bhathena, S. J., et al., ``Effects of W3 Fatty Acids
   and Vitamin E on Hormones Involved in Carbohydrate and Lipid
   Metabolism in Men,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
   54, 684 - 688, 1991.
       176. Bjerregaard, P. and J. Dyerberg, ``Mortality From
   Ischaemic Heart Disease and Cerebrovascular Disease in
   Greenland,'' International Journal of Epidemiology, 17, 514 -
   519, 1988.
       177. Bonaa, K. H., K. S. Bjerve, and A. Nordoy,
   ``Docosahexaenoic and Eicosapentaenoic Acids in Plasma
   Phospholipids are Divergently Associated with High Density
   Lipoprotein in Humans,'' Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, 12,
   675 - 681, 1992.
       178. Bonaa, K. H., K. S. Bjerve, and A. Nordoy, ``Habitual
   Fish Consumption, Plasma Phospholipid Fatty Acids, and Serum
   Lipids: The Tromso Study,'' American Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 55, 1126 - 1134, 1992.
       179. Bordet, J. C., M. C. Trzeciak, S. Durbin, and M.
   Dechavanne, ``Dose-Response of Platelet Aggregation and
   Bleeding Time During Eicosapentaenoic Acid Intake,''
   Thrombosis and Haemostasis, 65, 110, 1991.
       180. Boudreau, M. D., et al., ``Lack of Dose Response by
   Dietary N - 3 Fatty Acids at a Constant Ratio of N - 3 to N -
   6 Fatty Acids in Uppressing Eicosanoid Biosynthesis From
   Arachidonic Acid,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
   54, 11109117, 1991.
       181. Boulanger, C., V. B. Schini, H. Hendrickson, and P.
   M. Vanhoutte, ``Chronic Exposure of Cultured Endothelial Cells
   to Eicosapentaenoic Acid Potentiates the Release of
   Endothelium-Derived Relaxing Factor(s),'' British Journal of
   Pharmacology, 99, 176 - 180, 1990.
       182. Braden, G. A., H. R. Knapp, D. J. Fitzgerald, and G.
   A. FitzGerald, ``Dietary Fish Oil Accelerates the Response to
   Coronary Thrombolysis With Tissue-Type Plasminogen Activator:
   Evidence for a Modest Platelet Inhibitory Effect In Vivo,''
   Circulation, 82, 178 - 187, 1990.
       183. Brown, A. J. and D. C. K. Roberts, ``Fish and Fish
   Oil Intake: Effect On Haematological Variables Related To
   Cardiovascular Disease,'' Thrombosis Research, 64, 169 - 178,
   1991.
       184. Brown, J. E. and K. W. J. Wahle, ``Effect of Fish-Oil
   and Vitamin E Supplementation on Lipid Peroxidation and
   Whole-Blood Aggregation in Man,'' Clinica Chimica Acta, 193,
   147 - 156, 1990.
       185. Bulliyya, G., et al., ``Lipid Profiles Among
   Fish-Consuming Coastal and Non-Fish-Consuming Inland
   Opulations,'' European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 44, 481
   - 485, 1990.
       185a. Buring, J. E., et al., ``Decreased HDL2 and HDL3
   Cholesterol, ApoA - I and Apo A - II, and Increased Risk of
   Myocardial Infarction,'' Circulation, 85, 22 - 29, 1992.
       186. Cahill, P. D., et al., ``Inhibition of Vein Graft
   Intimal Thickening by Eicosapentaenoic Acid: Reduced
   Hromboxane Production Without Change in Lipoprotein Levels or
   Low-Density Lipoprotein Receptor Density,'' Journal of
   Vascular Surgery, 7, 108 - 118, 1988.
       187. Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health
   Examination, ``Periodic Health Examination, 1991 Update: 6.
   Acetylsalicylic Acid and the Primary Prevention of
   Cardiovascular Disease,'' Canadian Medical Association
   Journal, 145, 1091 - 1095, 1991.
       188. Charnock, J., ``Antiarrhythmic Effects of Fish
   Oils,'' World Reviews of Nutrition and Dietetics, 66, 278 -
   291, 1991.
       189. Clarke, J. T. R., G. Cullen-Dean, E. Regelink, L.
   Chan, and V. Rose, ``Increased Incidence of Epistaxis in
   Adolescents With Familial Hypercholesterolemia Treated With
   Fish Oil,'' Journal of Pediatrics, 116, 139 - 141, 1990.
       190. Cobiac, L., P. J. Nestel, L. M. H. Wing, and P. R. C.
   Howe, ``Effects of Dietary Sodium Restriction and Fish Oil
   Supplements on Blood Pressure in the Elderly,'' Clinical and
   Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology, 18, 265 - 268, 1991.
       191. Davidson, M. H., J. H. Burns, P. V. Subbaiah, M. E.
   Conn, and K. B. Drennan, ``Marine Oil Capsule Therapy for the
   Treatment of Hyperlipidemia,'' Archives of Internal Medicine,
   151, 1732 - 1740, 1991.
       192. Demiroglu, C., et al., ``Suppression of Atherogenesis
   by N - 3 Fatty Acids in the Cholesterol-Fed Rabbit,''
   Angiology--The Journal of Vascular Diseases, 323 - 330, 1991.
       193. Edwards, I. J., A. K. Gebre, W. D. Wagner, and J. S.
   Parks, ``Reduced Proteoglycan Binding of Low Density
   Lipoproteins From Monkeys (Macaca fascicularis) Fed a Fish Oil
   Versus Lard Diet,'' Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, 11, 1778
   - 1785,1991.
       194. Elwood, P. C., et al., ``Ischemic Heart Disease and
   Platelet Aggregation: The Caerphilly Collaborative Heart
   Disease Study,'' Circulation, 83, 38 - 44, 1991.
       195. Eritsland, J., H. Arnesen, P. Smith, I. Seljeflot,
   and K. Dahl, ``Effects of Highly Concentrated Omega-3
   Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Acetylsalicylic Acid, Alone
   and Combined, on Bleeding Time and Serum Lipid Profile,''
   Journal of Oslo City Hospital, 39, 97 - 101, 1989.
       196. Fahrer, H., F. Hoeflin, B. H. Lauterburg, E. Peheim,
   A. Levy, and T. L. Vischer, ``Diet and Fatty Acids: Can Fish
   Substitute for Fish Oil?'', Clinical and Experimental
   Rheumatology, 9, 403 - 406, 1991.
       197. Ferretti, A., et al., ``Effect of Fish Oil
   Supplementation on the Excretion of the Major Metabolite of
   Prostaglandin E in Healthy Male Subjects,'' Lipids, 26, 500 -
   503, 1991.
       198. Feskens, E. J. M., C. H. Bowles, and D. Kromhout,
   ``Inverse Association Between Fish Intake and Risk of Glucose
   Intolerance in Normoglycemic Elderly Men and Women,'' Diabetes
   Care, 14, 935 - 941, 1991.
       199. Force, T., et al., ``N - 3 Fatty Acids Increase
   Postischemic Blood Flow But Do Not Reduce Myocardial
   Necrosis,'' American Physiology Society, 26, H1204 - H1210,
   1989.
       200. Force, T., et al., ``Aspirin-Induced Decline in
   Prostacyclin Production in Patients With Coronary Artery
   Disease Is Due to Decreased Endoperoxide Shift,'' Circulation,
   84, 2286 - 2293, 1991.
       201. Fox, P. L. and P. E. DiCorleto, ``Fish Oils Inhibit
   Endothelial Cell Production of Platelet-Derived Growth
   Factor-Like Protein,'' Science, 241, 453 - 456, 1988.
       202. Franceschini, G., L. Calabresi, P. Maderna, C. Galli,
   G. Gianfranceschi, and C. R. Sirtori, ``W - 3 Fatty acids
   Selectively Raise High-Density Lipoprotein 2 Levels in Healthy
   Volunteers,'' Metabolism, 10, 1283 - 1286, 1991.
       203. Gans, R. O. B., et al., ``Fish Oil Supplementation in
   Patients with Stable Claudication,'' The American Journal of
   Surgery, 160, 490 - 495, 1990.
       204. Gazso, A., J. Kaliman, D. Horrobin, and H. Sinzinger,
   ``Effects of Omega-3 Fatty Acids on the Prostaglandin System
   in Healthy Volunteers,'' Prostaglandins in Clinical Research:
   Cardiovascular System, 517 - 521, 1989.
       205. Gerasimova, E., et al., ``The Effect of Dietary N - 3
   Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids on HDL Cholesterol in Chukot
   Residents vs Muscovites,'' Lipids, 26, 261 - 265, 1991.
       206. Gerhard, G. T., B. D. Patton, S. A. Lindquist, and R.
   C. Wander, ``Comparison of Three Species of Dietary Fish:
   Effects on Serum Concentrations of Low-Density-Lipoprotein
   Cholesterol and Apolipoprotein in Normotriglyceridemic
   Subjects,'' American Journal Clinical Nutrition, 54, 334 -
   339, 1991.
       207. Goren, A., H. Stankiewicz, R. Goldstein, and A.
   Drukker, ``Fish Oil Treatment of Hyperlipidemia in Children
   and Adolescents Receiving Renal Replacement Therapy,''
   Pediatrics, 88, 265 - 268, 1991.
       208. Gotto, A. M., J. Patsch, and A. Yamamoto,
   ``Postprandial Hyperlipidemia,'' American Journal of
   Cardiology, 68, 11A - 12A, 1991.
       209. Green, P., et al., ``Effects of Fish-Oil Ingestion on
   Cardiovascular Risk Factors in Hyperlipidemic Subjects in
   Israel: A Randomized, Double-Blind Crossover Study,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52, 1118 - 1124, 1990.
       210. Haglund, O., R. Luostarinen, R. Wallin, L. Wibell,
   and T. Saldeen, ``The Effects of Fish Oil on Triglycerides,
   Cholesterol, Fibrinogen and Malondialdehyde in Humans
   Supplemented with Vitamin E,'' Journal of Nutrition, 121, 165
   - 169, 1991.
       211. Haines, A. P., et al., ``Effects of a Fish Oil
   Supplement on Platelet Function, Haemostatic Variables and
   Albuminuria in Insulin-Dependent Diabetics,'' Thrombosis
   Research, 43, 643 - 655, 1986.
       212. Hallaq, H., A. Sellmayer, T. W. Smith, and A. Leaf,
   ``Protective Effect of Eicosapentaenoic Acid on Ouabain
   Toxicity in Neonatal Rat Cardiac Myocytes,'' Proceedings of
   the National Academy of Sciences, 87, 7834 - 7838, 1990.
       213. Hamakazi, T., M. Urakaze, S. Sawazaki, K. Yamazaki,
   H. Taki, and S. Yano, ``Comparison of Pulse Wave Velocity of
   the Aorta Between Inhabitants of Fishing and Farming Villages
   in Japan,'' Atherosclerosis, 73, 157 - 160, 1988.
       214. Hamakazi, T., S. Fischer, M. Urakaze, S. Sawazaki, S.
   Yano, and T. Kuwamori, ``Urinary Excretion of PGI 2/3 - M and
   Recent N - 6/N - 3 Fatty Acid Intake,'' Prostaglandins, 37,
   417 - 424, 1989.
       215. Hamazaki, T., E. Takazakura, K. Osawa, M. Urakaze,
   and S. Yano, ``Reduction in Microalbuminuria in Diabetics by
   Eicosapentaenoic Acid Ethyl Ester,'' Lipids, 25, 541 - 545,
   1990.
       216. Hansen, J. B., J. O. Olsen, L. Wilsgard, and B.
   Osterud, ``Effects of Dietary Supplementation with Cod Liver
   Oil on Monocyte Thromboplastin Synthesis, Coagulation and
   Fibrinolysis,'' Journal of Internal Medicine, 225, 133 - 139,
   1989.
       217. Harats, D., et al., ``Fish Oil Ingestion in Smokers
   and Nonsmokers Enhances Peroxidation of Plasma Lipoproteins,''
   Atherosclerosis, 90, 127 - 139, 1991.
       218. Harris, W. S., S. Silveria, and C. A. Dujovne, ``The
   Combined Effects of N - 3 Fatty Acids and Aspirin on
   Hemostatic Parameters in Man,'' Thrombosis Research, 57, 517 -
   526, 1990.
       219. Harris, W. S., S. L. Windsor, and C. A. Dujovne,
   ``Effects of Four Doses of n - 3 Fatty Acids Given to
   Hyperlipidemic Patients for Six Months,'' Journal of the
   American College of Nutrition, 10, 220 - 227, 1991.
       220. Harris, W. S. and S. L. Windsor, ``N - 3 Fatty Acid
   Supplements Reduce Chylomicron Levels In Healthy Volunteers,''
   Journal of Applied Nutrition, 43, 5 - 15, 1991.
       221. Hartog, J. M., J. M. J. Lamers, C. E. Essed, W. P.
   Schalkwijk, and P. D. Verdouw, ``Does Platelet Aggregation
   Play a Role in the Reduction in Localized Intimal
   Proliferation in Normolipidemic Pigs With Fixed Coronary
   Artery Stenosis Fed DietaryFish Oil?'', Atherosclerosis, 76,
   79 - 88, 1989.
       222. Hendra, T. J., et al., ``Effects of Fish Oil
   Supplements in NIDDM Subjects: Controlled Study,'' Diabetes
   Care, 13, 821 - 829, 1990.
       223. Hock, C. E., L. D. Beck, R. C. Bodine, and D. K.
   Reibel, ``Influence of Dietary N - 3 Fatty Acids on Myocardial
   Ischemia and Reperfusion,'' American Journal of Physiology,
   259, H1518 - H1526, 1990.
       224. Homma, Y., K. Ohshima, H. Yamaguchi, H. Nakamura, G.
   Araki, and Y. Goto, ``Effects of Eicosapentaenoic Acid on
   Plasma Lipoprotein Subfractions and Activities of Lecithin:
   Cholesterol Acyltransferase and Lipid Transfer Protein,''
   Atherosclerosis, 91, 145 - 153, 1991.
       225. Innis, S. M., H. V. Kuhnlein, and D. Kinloch, ``The
   Composition of Red Cell Membrane Phospholipids in Canadian
   Inuit Consuming a Diet High in Marine Mammals,'' Lipids, 23,
   1064 - 1068, 1988.
       226. Jensen, C. D., G. A. Spiller, V. J. Wookey, L. G.
   Wong, J. H. Whittam, and J. Scala, ``Plasma Lipids on Three
   Levels of Fish Oil Intake in Healthy Human Subjects,''
   Nutrition Reports International, 38, 165 - 172, 1988.
       227. Knapp, H. R., I. A. G. Reilly, P. Alessandrini, and
   G. A. FitzGerald, ``In Vivo Indices of Platelet and Vascular
   Function During Fish-Oil Administration in Patients with
   Atherosclerosis,'' New England Journal of Medicine, 314, 937 -
   942, 1986.
       228. Kremer, J. M., et al., ``Dietary Fish Oil and Olive
   Oil Supplementation in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis,''
   Arthritis and Rheumatism, 33, (1990):810 - 820.
       229. Lamers, J. M. J., J. M. Hartog, C. Guarnieri, I.
   Vaona, P. D. Verdouw, and J. F. Koster, ``Lipid Peroxidation
   in Normoxic and Ischemic-Reperfused Hearts of Fish Oil and
   Lard Fed Pigs,'' Journal of Molecular and Cellular Cardiology,
   20, 605 - 615, 1988.
       230. Lehr, H. A., A. Guhlmann, D. Nolte, D. Keppler, and
   K. Messmer, ``Leukotrienes as Mediators in
   Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury in a Microcirculation Model in the
   Hamster,'' Journal of Clinical Investigation, 87, 2036 - 2041,
   1991.
       231. Lehr, H. A., C. Hubner, B. Finckh, D. Nolte, U.
   Beisiegel, A. Kohlschutter, and K. Messmer, ``Dietary Fish Oil
   Reduces Leukocyte/Endothelium Interaction Following Systemic
   Administration of Oxidatively Modified Low Density
   Lipoprotein,'' Circulation, 84, 1725 - 1731, 1991.
       232. Lehr, H. A., et al., ``Role of Leukotrienes in
   Leukocyte Adhesion Following Systemic Administration of
   Oxidatively Modified Human Low Density Lipoprotein in
   Hamsters,'' Journal of Clinical Investigation, 88, 9 - 14,
   1991.
       233. Lehr, H. A., M. D. Menger, D. Nolte, and K. Messmer,
   ``Favorable Effects of Dietary Fish Oil on Capillary Perfusion
   Homogeneity After Ischemia and Reperfusion,'' Transplantation
   Proceedings, 23, 2356 - 2358, 1991.
       234. Li, X. and M. Steiner, ``Dose Response of Dietary
   Fish Oil Supplementation on Platelet Adhesion,''
   Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, 11, 39 - 46, 1991.
       235. Lindgren, F. T., G. L. Adamson, V. G. Shore, G. J.
   Nelson, and P. C. Schmidt, ``Effect of a Salmon Diet on the
   Distribution of Plasma Lipoproteins and Apolipoproteins in
   Normolipidemic Adult Men,'' Lipids, 26, 97 - 101, 1991.
       236. Lokesh, B. R., T. J. Sayers, and J. E. Kinsella,
   ``Interleukin-1 and Tumor Necrosis Factor Synthesis by Mouse
   Peritoneal Macrophages is Enhanced by Dietary N - 3
   olyunsaturated Fatty Acids,'' Immunology Letters, 23, 281 -
   286, 1989/1990.
       237. Lytle, J. S. and T. F. Lytle, ``W3 Fatty Acids in 40
   Species of Warm Water Finfish,'' World Review of Nutrition and
   Dietetics, 66, 513 - 514, 1991.
       238. Malasanos, T. H. and P. W. Stacpoole, ``Biological
   Effects of W - 3 Fatty Acids in Diabetes Mellitus,'' Diabetes
   Care, 14, 1160 - 1179, 1991.
       239. Malis, C. D., P. C. Weber, A. Leaf, and J. V.
   Bonventre, ``Incorporation of Marine Lipids into Mitochondrial
   Membranes Increases Susceptibility to Damage by Calcium and
   Reactive Oxygen Species: Evidence for Enhanced Activation of
   Phospholipase A2 in Mitochondria Enriched with N - 3 Fatty
   cids,'' Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 87,
   8845 - 8849, 1990.
       240. Malis, C. D., et al., ``Effects of Dietary w3 Fatty
   Acids on Vascular Contractility in Preanoxic and Postanoxic
   Aortic Rings,'' Circulation, 84, 1393 - 1401, 1991.
       241. Malle, E., W. Sattler, E. Prenner, H. J. Leis, A.
   Hermetter, A. Gries, and G. M. Kostner, ``Effects of Dietary
   Fish Oil Supplementation on Platelet Aggregability and
   Platelet Membrane Fluidity in Normolipemic Subjects with and
   without High Plasma Lp(a) Concentrations,'' Atherosclerosis,
   88,193 - 201, 1991.
       242. Manninen, V., L. Tenkanen, P. Koskinen, J. K.
   Huttunen, M. Manttari, O. Heinonen, and M. H. Frick, ``Joint
   Effects of Serum Triglyceride and LDL Cholesterol and HDL
   Cholesterol Concentrations on Coronary Heart Disease Risk in
   the Helsinki HeartStudy,'' Circulation, 85, 37 - 45, 1992.
       243. Manson, J. E., et al., ``A Prospective Study of
   Aspirin Use and Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease
   in Women,'' Journal of the American Medical Association, 266,
   521 - 527, 1991.
       244. Marckmann, P., J. Jespersen, T. Leth, and B.
   Sandstrom, ``Effect of Fish Diet Versus Meat Diet on Blood
   Lipids, Coagualtion and Fibrinolysis in Healthy Young Men,''
   Journal of Internal Medicine, 229, 562 - 572, 1991.
       245. McDonald, B. E., J. M. Gerrard, V. M. Bruce, and E.
   J. Cornoer, ``Comparison of the Effect of Canola Oil and
   Sunflower Oil on Plasma Lipids and Lipoporteins and on In Vivo
   Thromboxane A2 and Prostacyclin Production in Healthy Young
   Men,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 50, 1382 -
   1388, 1989.
       246. McLennan, P. L., M. Y. Abeywardena, and J. S.
   Charnock, ``Reversal of the Arrhythmogenic Effects of
   Long-Term Saturated Fatty Acid Intake by Dietary N - 3 and N -
   6 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids,'' American Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 51, 53 - 58, 1990.
       247. Meland, E., P. Fugelli, E. Laerum, R. Ronneberg, and
   L. Sandvik, ``Effect of Fish Oil on Blood Pressure and Blood
   Lipids in Men with Mild to Moderate Hypertension,''
   Scandinavian Journal of Primary Health Care, 7, 131 - 135,
   1989.
       248. Meydani, M., et al., ``Effect of Long-Term Fish Oil
   Supplementation on Vitamin E Status and Lipid Peroxidation in
   Women,'' Journal of Nutrition, 121, 484 - 491, 1991.
       249. Mohammed, K. S., T. A. Nagve, and H. Sprecher, ``The
   Metabolism of 20- and 22-Carbon Unsaturated Acids in Rat Heart
   and Myocytes as Mediated by Feeding Fish Oil,'' Lipids, 25,
   854 - 858, 1990.
       250. Molvig, J., F. Pociot, H. Worsaae, L. D. Wogensen, L.
   Baek, P. Christensen, T. Mandrup-Poulsen, K. Andersen, P.
   Madsen, J. Dyerberg, and J. Nerup, ``Dietary Supplementation
   with W - 3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids Decreases Mononuclear
   Cell Proliferation and Interleukin-1 B Content but Not
   Monokine Secretion in Healthy and Insulin-Dependent Diabetic
   Individuals,'' Scandinavian Journal of Immunology, 34, 399 -
   410, 1991.
       251. Mori, T. A., R. Vandongen, F. Mahanian, and A.
   Douglas, ``The Effect of Fish Oil on Plasma Lipids, Platelet
   and Neutrophil Function in Patients with Vascular Disease,''
   Advances in Prostaglandin, Thromboxane, and Leukotriene
   Research, 21,229 - 232, 1990.
       252. Mori, T. A., R. Vandongen, J. R. L. Maserei, I. L.
   Rouse, and D. Dunbar, ``Comparison of Diets Supplemented with
   Fish Oil or Olive Oil on Plasma Lipoproteins in
   Insulin-Dependent Diabetics,'' Metabolism, 40, 241 - 246,
   1991.
       253. Mueller, B. A., R. L. Talbert, C. H. Tegeler, and T.
   J. Prihoda, ``The Bleeding Time Effects of a Single Dose of
   Aspirin in Subjects Receiving Omega-3 Fatty Acid Dietary
   Supplementation,'' Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 31, 185 -
   190, 1991.
       253a. Muller, A. D., A. C. van Houwelingen, M. C. E. van
   DamMieras, B. M. Bas, and G. Hornstra, ``Effect of a Moderate
   Fish Intake on Haemostatic Parameters in Healty Males,''
   Thrombosis and Haemostasis, 61, 468 - 473, 1989.
       254. Mullertz, A., G. Holmer, and J. Grondahl-Hansen,
   ``Increased Concentration of Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor
   Type-1 in Plasma After Intake of Fish Oil,'' Fibrinolysis, 4,
   (suppl 2), 86 - 88, 1990.
       255. NHLBI, Consensus Development Conference on
   Triglyceride, High Density Lipoprotein, and Coronary Heart
   Disease, February 26 through 28, 1992.
       256. Nelson, G. J., P. C. Schmidt, and L. Corash, ``The
   Effect of a Salmon Diet on Blood Clotting, Platelet
   Aggregation and Fatty Acids in Normal Adult Men,'' Lipids, 26,
   87 - 96, 1991.
       257. Nestel, P. J., ``Fish Oil Attenuates the
   Cholesterol-Induced Rise in Lipoprotein Cholesterol,''
   American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 43, 752 - 757, 1986.
       258. Nikkila, M., ``Influence of Fish Oil on Blood Lipids
   in Coronary Artery Disease,'' European Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 45, 209 - 213, 1991.
       259. Nye, E. R., M. B. Ablett, M. C. Robertson, C. D. J.
   Ilsley, and W. H. F. Sutherland, ``Effect of Eicosapentaenoic
   Acid on Restenosis Rate, Clinical Course and Blood Lipids in
   Patients after Percutaneous Transluminal Coronary
   Angioplasty,'' Aus
       260. O'Connor, G. T., D. J. Malenka, E. M. Olmstead, P. S.
   Johnson, and C. H. Hennekins, ``A Meta-Analysis of Randomized
   Trials of Fish Oil in Prevention of Restenosis Following
   Coronary Angioplasty,'' American Journal of Preventive
   Medicine, 8, 186 - 192, 1992.
       261. Oh, S. Y., J. Ryue, C. H. Hsieh, and D. E. Bell,
   ``Eggs Enriched in W - 3 Fatty Acids and Alterations in Lipid
   Concentrations in Plasma and Lipoproteins and in Blood
   Pressure,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 54, 689 -
   695, 1991.
       262. Olaf, A., ``Effects of Linolenic and Alpha Linolenic
   Acids Intake on Blood Pressure in Man,'' Progress in Clinical
   Biologic Research, 301, 523 - 528, 1989.
       263. Olivieri, O., et al., ``Effects of Dietary Fish Oil
   on Malondialdehyde Production and Glutathione Peroxidase
   Activity in Hyperlipidaemic Patients,'' Scandinavian Journal
   of Clinical Laboratory Investigation, 48, 659 - 665, 1988.
       264. Owens, M. R. and W. T. Cave, ``Dietary Fish Lipids Do
   Not Diminish Platelet Adhesion to Subendothelium,'' British
   Journal of Haematology, 75, 82 - 85, 1990.
       265. Peto, R., et al., ``Randomized Trial of Prophylactic
   Daily Aspirin in British Male Doctors,'' British Medical
   Journal, 296, 313 - 316, 1988.
       266. Popeski, D., L. R. Ebbeling, P. B. Brown, G.
   Hornstra, and J. M. Gerrard, ``Blood Pressure During Pregnancy
   in Canadian Inuit: Community Differences Related to Diet,''
   Canadian Medical Association Journal, 145, 445 - 454, 1991.
       267. Phillipson, B. E., D. W. Rothrock, W. E. Connor, W.
   S. Harris, and D. R. Illingworth, ``Reduction of Plasma
   Lipids, Lipoproteins, and Apoproteins by Dietary Fish Oils in
   Patients with Hypertriglyceridemia,'' New England Journal of
   Medicine, 312, 1210 - 1216, 1985.
       268. Rapp, J. H., W. E. Connor, D. S. Lin, and J. M.
   Porter, ``Dietary Eicosapentaenoic Acid and Docosahexaenoic
   Acid From Fish Oil. Their Incorporation Into Advanced Human
   Atherosclerotic Plaques,'' Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis,
   11, 903 - 911, 1991.
       269. Riemersma, R. A. and C. A. Sargent, ``Dietary Fish
   Oil and Ischaemic Arrhythmias,'' Journal of Internal Medicine,
   225, (Suppl), 111 - 116, 1989.
       270. Rogers, K. A. and M. J. Karnovsky, ``Dietary Fish Oil
   Enhances Monocyte Adhesion and Fatty Streak Formation in the
   Hypercholesterolemic Rat,'' American Journal of Pathology,
   132, 382 - 388, 1988.
       271. Rogers, S., et al., ``Effects of Fish Oil Supplement
   on Serum Lipids, Blood Pressure, Bleeding Time, Haemostatic
   and Rheological Variables: A Double Blind Randomised
   Controlled Trial in Healthy Volunteers,'' Atherosclerosis, 63,
   137 - 143, 1987.
       272. Rose, G., ``Review of Primary Prevention Trials,''
   American Heart Journal, 114, 1013 - 1023, 1987.
       273. Saito, H., K. J. Chang, Y. Tamura, and S. Yoshida,
   ``Ingestion of Eicosapentaenoic Acid-Ethyl Ester Renders
   Rabbit LDL Less Susceptible To Cu2+-Catalyzed-Oxidative
   Modification,'' Biochemical and Biophysical Research
   Communications, 175, 61 - 67, 1991.
       274. Sarris, G. E., et al., ``Mechanisms Responsible for
   Inhibition of Vein-Graft Arteriosclerosis by Fish Oil,''
   Circulation, 80, I - 109 - I - 123, 1989.
       275. Sarris, G. E., et al., ``Inhibition of Accelerated
   Cardiac Allograft Arteriosclerosis by Fish Oil,'' Journal of
   Thoracic Cardiovascular Surgery, 97, 841 - 855, 1989.
       276. Saynor, R. and T. Gillott, ``Changes in Blood Lipids
   and Fibrinogen with a Note on Safety in a Long Term Study on
   the Effects of N - 3 Fatty Acids in Subjects Receiving Fish
   Oil Supplements and Followed for Seven Years,'' Lipids, 27,
   5339538, 1992.
       277. Schmidt, E. B., K. Varming, E. Ernst, P. Madsen, and
   J. Dyerberg, ``Dose-Response Studies on the Effect of N - 3
   Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids on Lipids and Haemostasis,''
   Thrombosis and Haemostasis, 63, 1 - 5, 1990.
       278. Schmidt, E. B., L. K. Nielsen, J. O. Pedersen, H. J.
   Kornerup, and J. Dyerberg, ``The Effect of N - 3
   Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids on Lipids, Platelet Function,
   Coagulation, Fibrinolysis and Monocyte Chemotaxis in Patients
   with Hypertension,'' ta, 189, 25 - 32, 1990.
       279. Schmidt, E. B., I. C. Klausen, S. D. Kristensen, H.
   H. Lervang, O. Faergeman, and J. Dyerberg, ``The Effect of N -
   3 Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids on Lp(a),'' Clinica Chemica
   Acta, 198, 271 - 278, 1991.
       280. Scientific Review Committee, Health and Welfare,
   Canada, ``Nutrition Recommendations,'' 1990.
       281. Seidelin, K. N., B. Myrup, and B. Fischer-Hansen, ``N
   - 3 Fatty Acids in Adipose Tissue and Coronary Artery Disease
   are Inversely Related,'' American Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 55, 1117 - 1119, 1992.
       282. Sempos, C. T. and R. S. Cooper, ``The Physician's
   Health Study: Aspirin for the Primary Prevention of Myocardial
   Infarction,'' New England Journal of Medicine, 318, 924 - 925,
   1988.
       283. Shapiro, A. C., et al., ``The Effect of Fish Oil
   Supplementation on Plasma a-Tocopherol, Retinol, Lipid and
   Lipoprotein Levels in Normolipidemic Subjects,'' Nutrition
   Research, 11, 539 - 548, 1991.
       284. Shimamoto, T., et al., ``Trends for Coronary Heart
   Disease and Stroke and Their Risk Factors in Japan,''
   Circulation, 79, 503 - 515, 1989.
       284a. Simons, L. A., J. B. Hickie, and S. Balasubramaniam,
   ``On the Effects of Dietary N - 3 Fatty Acids (MaxEPA) on
   Plasma Lipids and Lipoproteins in Patients with
   Hyperlipidemia,'' Atherosclerosis, 54, 75 - 88, 1985.
       285. Singer, P., S. Melzer, M. Goschel, and S. Augustin,
   ``Fish Oil Amplifies the Effect of Propranolol in Mild
   Essential Hypertension,'' Hypertension, 16, 682 - 691, 1990.
       286. Sirtori, C. R., et al., ``Olive Oil, Corn Oil, and N
   - 3 Fatty Acids Differently Affect Lipids, Lipoproteins,
   Platelets, and Superoxide Formation in Type II
   Hypercholesterolemia,'' American Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 56, 113 - 122, 1992.
       287. Spannagl, M., et al., ``Plasmatic Factors of
   Haemostasis Remain Essentially Unchanged Except for PAI
   Activity During n - 3 Fatty Acid Intake in Type I Diabetes
   Mellitus,'' Blood Coagulation and Fibrinolysis, 2, 259 - 265,
   1991.
       287a. Stampfer, M. J., F. M. Sacks, S. Salvini, W. C.
   Willett, and C. H. Hennekens, ``A Prospective Study of
   Cholesterol, Apolipoproteins, and the Risk of Myocardial
   Infarction,'' New England Journal of Medicine, 325, 373 - 381,
   1991.
       288. Thaulow, E., J. Erikssen, L. Sandvik, H. Stormorken,
   and P. F.Cohn, ``Blood Platelet Count and Function Are Related
   to Total and Cardiovascular Death in Apparently Healthy Men,''
   Circulation, 84, 613 - 617, 1991.
       289. Trials of Hypertension, ``The Effects of
   Nonpharmacologic Interventions on Blood Pressure of Persons
   With High Normal Levels,'' Journal of the American Medical
   Association, 267, 1213 - 1257, 1992.
       290. Van den Berg, J. J. M., et al., ``Increased N - 3
   Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid Content of Red Blood Cells from
   Fish Oil-Fed Rabbits Increases In Vitro Lipid Peroxidation,
   but Decreases Hemolysis,'' Free Radical Biology and Medicine,
   11, 39309399, 1991.
       291. Vandongen, R., T. A. Mori, J. P. Codde, K. G. Stanton
   and J. R. L. Masarei, ``Hypercholesterolaemic Effect of Fish
   Oil in Insulin-Dependent Diabetic Patients,'' Medical Journal
   of Australia, 148, 141 - 143, 1988.
       292. Van Houwelingen, R., A. Nordoy, E. van der Beek, U.
   Houstsmuller, M. de Metz, and G. Hornstra, ``Effect of a
   Moderate Fish Intake on Blood Pressure, Bleeding Time,
   Hematology, and Clinical Chemistry in Healthy Males,''
   American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 46, 424 - 436, 1987.
       293. Van Houwelingen, A. C., A. D. M. Kester, D. Kromhout,
   and G. Hornstra, ``Comparison Between Habitual Intake of
   Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Their Concentrations in Serum
   Lipid Fractions,'' European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 43,
   110920, 1989.
       294. Van Houwelingen, A. C., G. Hornstra, D. Kromhout, and
   C. D. L. Coulander, ``Habitual Fish Consumption, Fatty Acids
   of Serum Phospholipids and Platelet Function,''
   Atherosclerosis, 75, 157 - 165, 1989.
       295. Virella, G., et al., ``Immunosuppressive Effects of
   Fish Oil in Normal Human Volunteers: Correlation with the In
   Vitro Effects of Eicosapentaenoic Acid on Human Lymphocytes,''
   Clinical Immunology and Immunopathology, 61, 161 - 176, 1991.
       296. Vohwinkel, M., M. Hanisch, H. Wieland, and C. Luley,
   ``Effect on Glucose Metabolism in Healthy Volunteers Upon
   Treatment With Omega-3-Fatty Acids,'' Klinische Wochenschrift,
   68, 124, 1990.
       297. Wander, R. C. and B. D. Patton, ``Comparison of Three
   Species of Fish Consumed as Part of a Western Diet: Effects on
   Platelet Fatty Acids and Function, Hemostasis, and Production
   of Thromboxane,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 54,
   326 - 333, 1991.
       298. Weintraub, M. S., R. Zechner, A. Brown, S. Eisenberg,
   and J. L. Breslow, ``Dietary Polyunsaturated Fats of the W - 6
   and W - 3 Series Reduce Postprandial Lipoprotein Levels:
   Chronic and Acute Effects of Fat Saturation on Postprandial
   Lipoprotein Metabolism,'' Journal of Clinical Investigation,
   82, 1884 - 1893, 1988.
       299. Wing, L. M. H., et al., ``Effect of Fish Oil
   Supplementation on Blood Pressure in Treated Hypertensives,''
   Journal of Hypertension, 8, 339 - 343, 1990.
       300. Wojenski, C. M., M. J. Silver, and J. Walker,
   ``Eicosapentaenoic Acid Ethyl Ester as an Antithrombotic
   Agent: Comparison to an Extract of Fish Oil,'' Biochimica et
   Biophysica Acta, 1081, 33 - 38, 1991.
       301. Wolmarans, P., et al., ``Plasma Lipoprotein Response
   to Substituting Fish for Red Meat in the Diet,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 53, 1171 - 1176, 1991.
       302. Yarnell, J. W. G., et al., ``Fibrinogen, Viscosity
   and White Blood Cell Count are Major Risk Factors for Ischemic
   Heart Disease,'' Circulation, 83, 836 - 844, 1991.
       303. Yun, K. L., et al., ``Dose Response of Fish Oil
   Versus Safflower Oil on Graft Arteriosclerosis in Rabbit
   Heterotopic Cardiac Allografts,'' Annals of Surgery, 214, 155
   - 167, 1991.
       304. Zambon, S., et al., ``Effect of Glyburide and W3
   Fatty Acid Dietary Supplements and Lipid Metabolism in
   Patients with Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus,''
   American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 56, 447 - 454, 1992.
       305. Zilversmit, D. B., ``Atherogenesis: A Postprandial
   Phenomenon,'' Circulation, 60, 473 - 485, 1979.
   
   List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 101
   
       Food labeling, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
       Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
   and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food and
   Drugs, 21 CFR part 101 is amended as follows:
   
   
   PART 101--FOOD LABELING
   
       1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 101 continues to
   read as follows:
   
       Authority: Secs. 4, 5, 6 of the Fair Packaging and
   Labeling Act (15 U.S.C. 1453, 1454, 1455); secs. 201, 301,
   402, 403, 409, 701 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
   (21 U.S.C. 321, 331, 342, 343, 348, 371).
   
       2. Section 101.71 is amended by adding new paragraph (f)
   to read as follows:
   
   
   101.71  Health claims: claims not authorized.
   
   * * * * *
       (f) Omega-3 fatty acids and coronary heart disease.
   
       Dated: October 30, 1992.
   David A. Kessler,
   Commissioner of Food and Drugs.
   Louis W. Sullivan,
   Secretary of Health and Human Services.
   
       Note: The following tables will not appear in the annual
   Code of Federal Regulations.
   
   BILLING CODE 4160 - 01 - F
   
   [FR Doc. 92 - 31518 Filed 12 - 28 - 92; 8:45 am]
   BILLING CODE 4160 - 01 - C
   