DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                                             
                                                                                                    
Food And Drug Administration                                                                        
                                                                                                    
21 CFR Parts 103, 129, 165, and 184                                                                 
                                                                                                    
[Docket No. 88P-0030|                                                                               
                                                                                                    
RIN 0910-AA11                                                                                       
                                                                                                    
BEVERAGES:  BOTTLED WATER                                                                           
                                                                                                    
AGENCY:  Food and Drug Administration, HHS.                                                         
ACTION:  Final rule.                                                                                
SUMMARY:  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is establishing                                    
a standard of identity for bottled water.  At the same time, the                                    
agency is recodifying the standard of quality for bottled water.                                    
FDA is revising the definition for bottled water in the quality                                     
standard to include mineral water and ingredient uses of this                                       
product.  In addition, FDA is defining "artesian water," "ground                                    
water," "mineral water," "purified water," "sparkling bottled                                       
water," "spring water," "sterile water," and "well water."  FDA                                     
is exempting mineral water from certain physical and chemical                                       
allowable levels.  FDA is taking these actions, in part, in                                         
response to a petition submitted by the International Bottled                                       
Water Association (IBWA).  FDA finds that the regulations will                                      
promote honesty and fair dealing in the interest of consumers as                                    
well as the interests of the regulated industry.                                                    
EFFECTIVE DATE:  (Insert date 180 days after date of publication                                    
in the FEDERAL REGISTER.)  The Director of the Office of the                                        
FEDERAL REGISTER approves the incorporations by reference in                                        
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 of certain                                        
publications at 21 CFR 129.35(a)(3)(ii), 129.80(g), and 184.1563(c), effective  180 days after date 
of publication in the                                                                               
FEDERAL REGISTER.                                                                                   
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:                                                                    
     Shellee A. Davis,                                                                              
     Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS-306),                                        
     Food and Drug Administration,                                                                  
     200 C St. SW.,                                                                                 
     Washington, DC  20204,                                                                         
     202-205-4681.                                                                                  
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:                                                                          
                          I.  BACKGROUND                                                            
     In the FEDERAL REGISTER of January 5, 1993 (58 FR 393), FDA                                    
published a proposal to establish a standard of identity in                                         
 165.110(a) for bottled water (hereinafter referred to as the                                      
January 1993 proposal).  At the same time, the agency proposed to                                   
recodify in  165.110(b), (c), and (d), the standard of quality                                     
for bottled water currently found in  103.35.  FDA proposed to                                     
revise the definition for bottled water in the quality standard                                     
to include mineral water and ingredient uses of this product.  In                                   
addition, FDA proposed to define "artesian water," "distilled                                       
water," "mineral water," "purified water," "spring water," and                                      
"well water."  FDA proposed to exempt mineral water from certain                                    
physical and chemical allowable levels if the mineral water                                         
contained total dissolved solids (TDS) in excess of 500 parts per                                   
million (ppm).  Interested persons were given until March 8,                                        
1993, to submit comments.                                                                           
     In the FEDERAL REGISTER of March 9, 1993 (58 FR 13041), FDA                                    
extended the comment period to April 7, 1993.  In addition, the                                     
agency reopened the comment period for comments concerning two                                      
spring water surveys that FDA received in response to the                                           
proposal (58 FR 34010, June 23, 1993).  Interested persons were                                     
given until July 23, 1993, to submit comments concerning the two                                    
spring water surveys.                                                                               
     FDA received approximately 430 responses, each of which                                        
contained one or more comments, from trade and retail                                               
associations, government organizations, manufacturers, consumers,                                   
health care professionals, retailers, consumer groups, State                                        
groups, private organizations, the U.S. Congress, professional                                      
societies, and universities.  The comments generally supported                                      
the proposal.  Several comments addressed issues outside the                                        
scope of the proposal (e.g., microbiological quality standards,                                     
definitions for multicomponent bottled water beverages) that will                                   
not be discussed here.  A number of comments suggested                                              
modifications and revisions in various provisions of the                                            
proposal.  A summary of the suggested changes and the agency's                                      
responses follow.                                                                                   
     Elsewhere in this issue of the FEDERAL REGISTER, FDA is                                        
proposing to update the methods referenced in  165.110(b)(3) and                                   
to exempt mineral water from the allowable level for aluminum in                                    
the quality standard.  FDA is responding to the comments on the                                     
January 1993 proposal that addressed those issues in that                                           
proposal.                                                                                           
                                                                                                    
                  II.  THE STANDARD OF IDENTITY                                                     
                           A.  Coverage                                                             
     The agency proposed in the January 1993 proposal, to move                                      
the definition for bottled water from the quality standard to the                                   
standard of identity and to revise the definition to include                                        
mineral water and ingredient uses of bottled water.                                                 
Specifically, FDA proposed that bottled water be defined as water                                   
that is intended for human consumption and that is sealed in                                        
bottles or other containers with no added ingredients, except                                       
that it may contain safe and suitable antimicrobial agents.  The                                    
agency also proposed that bottled water may be used as an                                           
ingredient in beverages (e.g., diluted juices, flavored bottled                                     
water) but stated that the term did not cover those food                                            
ingredients that are declared in ingredient labeling as "water,"                                    
"carbonated water," "disinfected water," "filtered water,"                                          
"seltzer water," "soda water," and "tonic water."  Finally, FDA                                     
proposed that the processing and bottling of bottled water must                                     
comply with applicable regulations in part 129 (21 CFR part 129).                                   
     1.  One comment asked why bottled water is singled out for a                                   
source identification requirement (e.g., water from a municipal                                     
source), and why soft drinks, beers, reconstituted juices, salad                                    
dressings, and other products that contain water as an ingredient                                   
are not also subject to this requirement.                                                           
     The agency considered the scope of the bottled water                                           
standard, particularly its application to water used as an                                          
ingredient in multicomponent foods such as flavored waters and                                      
diluted juices, in the proposal to this final rule (58 FR 393 at                                    
395).  FDA stated that highlighting the water component of these                                    
products is effectively a claim that the water ingredient in the                                    
beverage has particular value, and that consumers are likely to                                     
purchase these products in large measure because of the claim                                       
concerning the water ingredient.  For example, in a significant                                     
number of situations, the labeling of products stated or implied                                    
that the water originated from a source such as a spring or a                                       
well.  In contrast, in products such as soft drinks or                                              
reconstituted juices in which water is simply used as an                                            
ingredient, no claim is made about the water.  The intent of the                                    
proposal was not to require source labeling of all water                                            
ingredients from a municipal source, but to require it in the                                       
former type of situation, where the finished product is bottled                                     
water or the labeling makes an explicit or implied claim                                            
concerning the water ingredient.                                                                    
     Under section 403(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic                                   
Act (the act)(21 U.S.C. 343(a)), a product is misbranded if its                                     
labeling is false or misleading in any particular.  To determine                                    
whether the absence of information on food labels constitutes                                       
misbranding the agency must take into account the extent to which                                   
the labeling fails to reveal facts material in light of                                             
representations made or suggested with respect to consequences                                      
that may result from the use of the article under customary or                                      
usual conditions of use (section 201(n) of the act (21 U.S.C.                                       
321(n))).  The agency does not deem source labeling of ingredient                                   
water from a municipal source as a material fact unless labeling                                    
representations are made or suggested that the water possesses                                      
particular properties.                                                                              
     Thus, the agency finds no reason to include water that is                                      
not a highlighted ingredient in the bottled water standards, and                                    
the comment has not provided a basis to do so.  Therefore,                                          
 165.110 applies only to bottled water and ingredient uses of                                      
water where the water ingredient is highlighted in the labeling.                                    
     2.  Two comments expressed concern about sparkling water                                       
being regulated under the bottled water standards.  They stated                                     
that sparkling water has long been understood by consumers and                                      
recognized by FDA as a common or usual name for unsweetened and                                     
unflavored water containing compressed carbon dioxide.  The                                         
comments contended that consumers clearly understand "sparkling                                     
water" to be in the same category as "carbonated water," "seltzer                                   
water," "soda water," and "tonic water," substances that                                            
historically have been regulated by FDA as "soft drinks."  They                                     
stated that as such, "sparkling water" is more appropriately                                        
classified as a "soft drink" that is not subject to the proposed                                    
bottled water standard.                                                                             
     Some comments stated that it was unclear whether "sparkling                                    
water" was included under the exemption for "carbonated water"                                      
and asked for clarification.  One comment stated that if the                                        
standard does not encompass the term, FDA should include                                            
"sparkling water" in the definition of bottled water.                                               
     FDA stated in the preamble to the proposed rule that when a                                    
beverage is labeled as containing "water," "carbonated water,"                                      
"disinfected water," "filtered water," "seltzer water," "soda                                       
water," and "tonic water," there is no claim that the water                                         
ingredient has particular value, and that, thus, these                                              
ingredients were not included in the definition of bottled water                                    
(58 FR 393 at 395).  This proposed exclusion did not extend to                                      
the term "sparkling water" or to any other term not specifically                                    
excluded by the standard.  In the proposal, the agency used the                                     
example of the term "sparkling" as indicating that the water                                        
ingredient possessed a specific characteristic or had received a                                    
specific treatment (id.).  FDA tentatively concluded at that time                                   
that use of such highlighted terms concerning the water component                                   
was effectively a claim that the water ingredient in the beverage                                   
had particular value, and that consumers were likely to purchase                                    
these beverages in large measure because of the claim.                                              
     The agency notes, however, that sparkling water was included                                   
in the former soda water standard.  In the FEDERAL REGISTER of                                      
February 16, 1967 (32 FR 2940), the agency amended the soda water                                   
standard to add the term "sparkling water" to the standard as an                                    
example of a type of soda water generally designated by a                                           
particular common name.  FDA proposed this change to permit the                                     
designation of nonsweetened and nonflavored soda water by names                                     
other than those prescribed in the standard (31 FR 11109, August                                    
20, 1966).  However, FDA repealed the standard of identity for                                      
soda water in the FEDERAL REGISTER of January 6, 1989 (54 FR 398)                                   
because some provisions of the standard were being adequately                                       
dealt with by other regulations, while other provisions were no                                     
longer necessary.                                                                                   
     Given the traditional use of this term, as evidenced by the                                    
repealed standard, the agency agrees that the term "sparkling                                       
water" describes a nonsweetened and nonflavored carbonated water,                                   
and that it thus, is a term that is synonymous with the term                                        
"carbonated water."  The fact is that the agency had separate                                       
standards at one time for bottled water and for soda water, and                                     
that it included sparkling water in the soda water, and not the                                     
bottled water standard.  Therefore, the comments have persuaded                                     
the agency that some types of sparkling water are in the same                                       
category as "carbonated water," "seltzer water," "soda water,"                                      
and "tonic water," and should be regulated as a soft drink                                          
instead of as a bottled water.  Accordingly, the bottled water                                      
standard in  165.110 does not include those food ingredients                                       
that are declared in ingredient labeling as "water," "carbonated                                    
water," "disinfected water," "filtered water," "seltzer water,"                                     
"soda water," "sparkling water" (except as explained in this                                        
response) and "tonic water."                                                                        
     However, the term "sparkling water" may also refer to water                                    
that is naturally carbonated (i.e., contains carbon dioxide as it                                   
emerges from the source) and that is labeled as "sparkling                                          
water."  The bottled water standard has traditionally included                                      
this type of water because the water has not been carbonated in                                     
the same sense that a soda water is carbonated (i.e., with added                                    
carbon dioxide).  Thus, water that contains carbon dioxide as                                       
extracted from the source is not a soda water and must continue                                     
to be regulated as a bottled water.  Therefore, to differentiate                                    
between the two types of sparkling waters, the agency is defining                                   
"sparkling bottled water" in  165.110(a)(2)(v) as bottled water                                    
that, after treatment and possible replacement of carbon dioxide,                                   
contains the same amount of carbon dioxide that it had at                                           
emergence from the source.  This definition is in accordance with                                   
the definition in the European Regional Codex Standard (ERCS) for                                   
"naturally carbonated natural mineral water" (Ref. 1).                                              
     The agency concludes that defining the term "sparkling                                         
bottled water" is within the scope of this rulemaking because FDA                                   
proposed that sparkling water be included under the bottled water                                   
standard.  As a consequence of proposing that course of action,                                     
FDA has been persuaded that some types of sparkling water should                                    
be excluded from the standard and that it should differentiate                                      
among the types of sparkling water in its bottled water                                             
regulations.                                                                                        
     3.  Two comments objected to the exclusion of carbonated                                       
bottled waters from the bottled water standards.  They stated                                       
that any product that professes to be, or that has as an                                            
important ingredient that is one of the defined bottled water                                       
types (e.g., spring water, mineral water), whether noncarbonated                                    
or carbonated, should be considered to be bottled water.  The                                       
comments contended that only those carbonated products with                                         
respect to which no reference is made to defined bottled water                                      
types should be excluded.                                                                           
     The agency agrees with the comment.  Products or ingredients                                   
described by a term that is defined by the standard of identity                                     
(e.g., "spring water") or with a term that makes a claim about                                      
the water (e.g., "natural water") are standardized waters and                                       
must comply with  165.110 whether carbonation has been added or                                    
not.  Although terms to describe the water ingredient in a                                          
product may sometimes be used in combination with a term that is                                    
not included under the standards (e.g., "carbonated spring water"                                   
or "filtered natural water"), the product or the water ingredient                                   
in the product must comply with the bottled water standards                                         
because a claim is being made concerning the value of the water.                                    
However, use of only a term specifically excluded from the                                          
bottled water standards (e.g., "filtered water" or "carbonated                                      
water") means that no claim is being made concerning the value of                                   
the water, and, thus, the water is not a standardized food.                                         
     4.  Several comments stated that it is inconsistent for FDA                                    
to exempt carbonated waters from the bottled water standards.                                       
They held that carbonated water may be consumed at levels which                                     
constitute a major portion of an individual's daily water intake.                                   
One comment added that exempting carbonated water from the                                          
bottled water category does not provide for consumer safety or                                      
confidence.                                                                                         
     The agency does not agree with the comments, although it                                      
acknowledges that carbonated waters may constitute a major                                          
portion of some consumers' daily water intake.  However, FDA                                        
points out that standards of identity and quality are not                                           
established because a product is consumed in large volumes or for                                   
consumer safety or confidence but are established to promote                                        
honesty and fair dealing in the interest of consumers.                                              
     "Carbonated water" or "soda water" has traditionally not                                       
been covered by the provisions of the bottled water quality                                         
standard because it has been considered to be a soft drink.                                         
Bottled water and soda water, although similar, are two different                                   
foods as evidenced by the fact that the agency had quality                                          
standards for bottled water at the same time that it had a                                          
standard of identity for soda water that included "carbonated                                       
water."                                                                                             
     FDA tentatively concluded in the proposal that it would not                                    
include "carbonated water" in the standards for bottled water                                       
because it has historically not been considered to be bottled                                       
water.  In addition, the agency tentatively concluded that the                                      
standards for bottled water covered water ingredients that were                                     
highlighted because of a claim concerning the water ingredient                                      
itself.                                                                                             
     Labels of foods that claim to contain as an ingredient, or                                     
to be, "carbonated water" do not claim or imply any particular                                      
properties or characteristics for the water ingredient.  Any                                        
claims on such foods for the ingredient are simply that carbon                                      
dioxide has been added.  Thus, "carbonated water" does not fit                                      
within the type of food that the bottled water standard is                                          
intended to address because no claim is being made about the                                        
water itself.  The agency finds no reason to include "carbonated                                    
water" in the bottled water standard, and the comment has not                                       
provided any basis to do so.  Therefore, the agency concludes                                       
that it has not been inconsistent in the regulation of                                              
"carbonated water" and "bottled water."                                                             
     5.  Two comments stated that the terms "carbonated water,"                                     
"disinfected water," "filtered water," "seltzer water," "soda                                       
water," and "tonic water" should be defined to avoid confusion by                                   
industry and consumers as to what types of water are covered by                                     
the bottled water standards and what types of water are not.  One                                   
of the comments stated that these terms may have different                                          
meanings to the bottled water and beverage industries and                                           
consumers.                                                                                          
     The agency does not agree with the comments.  There is                                         
general understanding of the meanings of these terms, even though                                   
they are not defined in FDA's regulations.  "Carbonated water,"                                     
"disinfected water," "filtered water," "seltzer water," "soda                                       
water," and "tonic water" are common or usual names that are in                                     
general use by both manufacturers and consumers.  In the proposal                                   
to this final rule (58 FR 393 at 395), the agency noted that the                                    
terms "carbonated water," "seltzer water," "soda water," and                                        
"tonic water" have historically been considered to be soft                                          
drinks, and that "disinfected water" and "filtered water"                                           
described water that has been subjected to a commonly used                                          
treatment.                                                                                          
     The reason for not addressing these terms under the bottled                                    
water standard is that they make no claims about the water used                                     
in the ingredients that they denominate.  The exclusion is not                                      
based on the specific source, composition, or processing of these                                   
types of waters.  The comments did not provide any information to                                   
persuade the agency to conclude otherwise.  Therefore, FDA is not                                   
defining these common terms at this time.  However, persons                                         
interested in establishing definitions for "carbonated water,"                                      
"disinfected water," "filtered water," "seltzer water," "soda                                       
water," and "tonic water" may petition the agency to do so,                                         
providing recommended definitions and justification for the                                         
recommendations.                                                                                    
     6.  Several comments objected to any definition of bottled                                     
water that does not allow for the addition of ingredients such as                                   
minerals for flavor, flavors that comprise less than 1 percent by                                   
weight of the product, and carbon dioxide.  They stated that                                        
changing the definition of bottled water to exclude established                                     
products would:  (1)  Be costly to the bottled water industry;                                      
(2)  exempt excluded bottled water products from meeting FDA's                                      
proposed health, safety, and quality standards; and (3)  confuse                                    
rather than unify regulatory authority.  One comment declared                                       
that it is imperative that the final regulation include all                                         
established products of the bottled water industry.                                                 
     One comment stated that some model codes and State                                             
regulations provide for the addition of ingredients to bottled                                      
water provided that these additives comprise less than 1 percent                                    
by weight of the final product.  The comment noted that many                                        
consumers may supply a major portion of their daily water intake                                    
needs with these 1 percent bottled water products.                                                  
     Another comment noted that  129.80(a) states that                                             
carbonation, mineral addition, or any other process shall be done                                   
in a manner so as to be effective in accomplishing its intended                                     
purpose and in accordance with section 409 of the act.  It stated                                   
that there is no reason to disallow any of these processes or                                       
their resultant products as bottled water.                                                          
     FDA does not agree that it is changing the definition of                                       
bottled water.  The agency acknowledges that some State                                             
regulations define bottled waters with added flavors, minerals,                                     
and carbon dioxide as described in the comments (Ref. 2).                                           
However, the Federal definition of "bottled water" has                                              
traditionally been "water that is sealed in bottles or other                                        
containers and that is intended for human consumption"                                              
( 103.35(a)(1) and 129.3(b) (1994)).  This definition is the                                      
basis of the definition that FDA is adopting in this final rule                                     
( 165.110(a)(1)).  Although  129.80(a) mentions treatment of                                      
product water with carbonation and mineral addition, among other                                    
processes, any bottled water product with added ingredients would                                   
be just that--bottled water with added ingredients.  (However,                                      
see the discussion of fluoride in bottled water in comment 8 of                                     
this document.)                                                                                     
     Firms may manufacture nonstandardized bottled water products                                   
with ingredients such as minerals for flavor, flavors that                                          
comprise less than 1 percent by weight of the product, and carbon                                   
dioxide added to bottled water.  The common or usual name of the                                    
resultant product must reflect these additions.  However, only                                      
the bottled water ingredient is subject to the standard in                                          
 165.110.  The other ingredients in the product are subject to                                     
regulation under the food additive or other food ingredient                                         
provisions of the act.  Thus, it is not necessary to include                                        
added ingredients, such as minerals for flavor, flavors that                                        
comprise less than 1 percent by weight of the product, or carbon                                    
dioxide, in the standard for bottled water.                                                         
     Therefore, for the reasons listed above the agency is not                                      
persuaded by the comments to include the addition of minerals,                                      
flavors, and carbon dioxide in the standard of identity for                                         
bottled water in  165.110(a)(1).                                                                   
     7.  One comment stated that all bottled waters imported into                                   
the United States should meet all of FDA's requirements for                                         
bottled waters including mineral water.  It added that U.S.                                         
standards should not be lessened to meet European standards                                         
unless there are compelling public health reasons for doing so.                                     
     FDA agrees that both foreign and domestic bottled waters                                       
sold in interstate commerce in the United States must comply with                                   
the act and the regulations issued thereunder, including the                                        
specific regulations for bottled water found in part 129 and                                        
 165.110.  Although the agency attempts, where possible, to                                        
harmonize its regulations with the regulations of other                                             
countries, there must be appropriate grounds for FDA to amend any                                   
of its bottled water regulations, whether or not such action                                        
would harmonize international standards.                                                            
                      B.  Fluoridated Water                                                         
     The agency did not propose a definition for "fluoridated                                       
water," although it did request comments on the need to define                                      
types of bottled water other than those for which it proposed                                       
definitions.  Some comments addressed issues on fluoridated water                                   
that fall within the scope of this rulemaking.  Therefore, the                                      
agency is addressing these issues in this final rule.                                               
     8.  Several comments stated that the addition of fluoride to                                   
bottled water should be allowed.  One comment noted that many                                       
people specifically request and use fluoridated water because of                                    
its benefits to dental health.  The comment stated that these                                       
products have long been established and should not be                                               
discontinued.  One comment noted an inconsistency between the                                       
definition of bottled water and the provisions of proposed                                          
 165.110(b)(4)(ii) that discuss the addition of fluoride.                                          
     FDA agrees that there is an inconsistency between the                                          
proposed standard of identity and the standard of quality for                                       
bottled water with respect to the addition of fluoride.  The                                        
agency proposed in  165.110(a)(1) that bottled water contain no                                    
added ingredients other than safe and suitable antimicrobial                                        
agents.  This provision would preclude the addition of fluoride                                     
(58 FR 393 at 407).  The quality standard, however, provides                                        
maximum levels for bottled water to which fluoride is added                                         
( 165.110(b)(4)(ii)).                                                                              
     The agency recognizes that water with fluoride added may                                       
provide a benefit to consumers.  The Surgeon General's Report on                                    
Nutrition and Health (the Surgeon General's report) recommends                                      
that community water systems contain fluoride at optimal levels                                     
for prevention of tooth decay, and that, if such water is not                                       
available, other appropriate sources of fluoride should be used                                     
(Ref. 3).  Bottled water may be used by some consumers as an                                        
alternative to community drinking water.  Therefore, because of                                     
the unique circumstances presented by fluoride, the agency is                                       
providing for the optional addition of fluoride to bottled water                                    
in  165.110(a)(1) within the limitations established in the                                        
quality standard ( 165.110(b)(4)(ii)).                                                             
     Because the agency is providing for the optional addition of                                   
fluoride to bottled water, the standardized product may be a                                        
multiingredient food, and, as such, its label must bear                                             
ingredient labeling.  According to  101.4(a)(1) (21 CFR                                            
101.4(a)(1)), all food ingredients are required to be declared on                                   
the label.  Therefore, bottled water containing added fluoride                                      
must list the names of the water ingredient and the fluoride.                                       
     Therefore, because FDA is providing for the optional                                           
addition of fluoride to bottled water, and thus, bottled water                                      
may be a multicomponent food, the agency is adding                                                  
 165.110(a)(4) to require that each of the ingredients used in                                     
the food be declared on the label as required by the applicable                                     
sections of 21 CFR parts 101 and 130.                                                               
     9.  Several comments requested that FDA define "fluoridated                                    
water."  Some of these comments recommended that "fluoridated                                       
water" be defined as bottled water containing naturally occurring                                   
or added fluoride, and that the label specify whether fluoride is                                   
naturally occurring or added.  One comment stated that the                                          
regulation only discusses maximum limits on fluoride addition                                       
without setting a minimum, thus opening a loophole that would                                       
allow manufacturers to add insignificant amounts of fluoride to                                     
their products and call them "fluoridated water."  One comment                                      
stated that any water that is called "fluoridated water" should                                     
contain not less than 0.8 milligram per liter (mg/L) fluoride                                       
ion.  Another comment stated that any water that is defined as                                      
"fluoridated water" should contain not less than 1.0 mg/L                                           
fluoride.  One comment requested that "fluoridated water" be                                        
defined only as water containing added fluoride.                                                    
     FDA has provided for the use of the terms "fluoridated,"                                       
"fluoride added," and "with added fluoride" on the label or in                                      
labeling of bottled water that contains added fluoride in                                           
 101.13(q)(8).  The agency adopted this regulation in the                                          
FEDERAL REGISTER of January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2302 at 2314) and                                        
stated that the presence of fluoride in bottled water is of                                         
interest to consumers, and its declaration should not be                                            
prohibited.  However, the agency also stated that it did not wish                                   
to encourage unnecessary addition of fluoride to bottled water,                                     
and that it was concerned that if it permitted the use of terms                                     
like "good source of fluoride" or "high in fluoride," they might                                    
encourage such additions.  Therefore, the agency has not defined                                    
a nutrient content claim for fluoride.  Instead, it has provided                                    
that a statement indicating the presence of added fluoride could                                    
be used, but that the claim cannot include a description of the                                     
level of fluoride present.                                                                          
     As stated in another final rule in the FEDERAL REGISTER of                                     
January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2079 at 2149), the agency has considered                                     
the identity statement "fluoridated water" to be misleading if                                      
the product is derived from a source naturally containing                                           
fluoride.  Because the term "fluoridated" represents that                                           
fluoride has been added to the water, FDA concluded that the term                                   
"fluoridated water" should be used to describe only products to                                     
which fluoride has been added in the manufacturing process, and                                     
that such products would be required to bear nutrition labeling                                     
that complies with the simplified format (id.).  FDA also points                                    
out that fluoride may not be present in amounts that exceed the                                     
limits in  165.110(b)(4)(ii).                                                                      
     Although labeling could be used to describe whether fluoride                                   
was added or naturally present in bottled water, the term                                           
"fluoridated" continues to mean that fluoride has been added.                                       
FDA is not establishing a minimum level for fluoride addition                                       
because the terms "fluoridated," "fluoride added," or "with added                                   
fluoride" have been defined in  101.13(q)(8) and amending that                                     
provision falls outside the scope of this final rule.  However,                                     
if the addition of fluoride to water is so minimal that it would                                    
be considered dietarily insignificant, a product that bears a                                       
claim about such addition would be misbranded under section                                         
403(a) of the act in that its labeling would be misleading                                          
because the use of the term "fluoridated" or any of its synonyms                                    
implies that fluoride has been added in a meaningful amount.                                        
Thus, FDA concludes that it has not created a loophole that would                                   
allow manufacturers to add insignificant amounts of fluoride to                                     
their products and call them "fluoridated water."                                                   
     The Surgeon General's Report states that the optimal                                           
fluoride concentration of approximately 1 ppm fluoride has been                                     
shown to reduce the prevalence of dental caries by more than 50                                     
percent (Ref. 3).  In addition, the Surgeon General's Report                                        
states that current recommendations for optimum fluoride                                            
concentrations vary from 0.7 to 1.2 ppm (id.).  Therefore, the                                      
comments' suggested values of 0.8 mg/L and 1.0 mg/L fluoride are                                    
meaningful amounts of this mineral in bottled water.                                                
     10.  One comment stated that infant bottled waters may                                         
contain fluoride, and that the presence of this mineral may be a                                    
problem if parents are not aware that too much fluoride is                                          
undesirable, or that an infant should not receive both a                                            
physician's prescription of fluoride drops and drink water                                          
containing fluoride.  For this reason, the comment stated that                                      
the label of a bottled water containing 0.3 ppm or more fluoride                                    
should include a statement advising parents not to use the                                          
product before consulting with their baby's physician if the baby                                   
is receiving a fluoride supplement.  The comment added that                                         
bottled water for general use is also used for infants, so such a                                   
label statement should be required on any bottled water                                             
containing 0.3 ppm or more fluoride.  It stated that this level                                     
of fluoride is taken from the current recommendation of                                             
pediatricians and pediatric dentists relating to administration                                     
of fluoride supplements.  It suggested that the statement could                                     
read as follows:  "Note:  If you are giving your baby a fluoride                                    
supplement, do not use water with fluoride without consulting                                       
your doctor."                                                                                       
     The agency agrees that an advisory statement such as that                                      
suggested by the comment may be appropriate to prevent unwanted                                     
aesthetic effects from excessive doses of fluoride, and it                                          
encourages manufacturers to provide such information to                                             
consumers, especially on products labeled for infant use.                                           
However, FDA does not agree that this statement should be                                           
mandatory on all bottled waters containing 0.3 ppm or more                                          
fluoride.  There are allowable levels for fluoride in the quality                                   
standard, and bottled water exceeding these levels must be                                          
labeled as substandard.  The allowable levels are related to                                        
secondary levels established by the Environmental Protection                                        
Agency (EPA) for public drinking water in 40 CFR parts 141 and                                      
143 and take into consideration excessive infant fluoride intake.                                   
In addition, as discussed in the previous comment, the Surgeon                                      
General's Report recommends an optimal level of 1.0 ppm fluoride                                    
in drinking water.                                                                                  
     Fluoride supplements are generally prescribed for breast-fed                                   
infants because those infants frequently consume little or no                                       
water.  Human milk contains little fluoride, even in areas with                                     
fluoridated water supplies.  Physicians may also prescribe                                          
fluoride supplements for infants not receiving adequate dietary                                     
fluoride.  Health care professionals must take into consideration                                   
the patient's weight and the exposure to fluoride from dietary                                      
and other sources to establish the proper dose (Ref. 4).                                            
     Therefore, the agency finds no basis to require an advisory                                    
statement concerning infant fluoride consumption on bottled                                         
waters containing 0.3 ppm or more fluoride.                                                         
                         C.  Nomenclature                                                           
     FDA proposed that the name of the standardized food meeting                                    
the definition of bottled water in  165.110(a)(1) is "bottled                                      
water" or one of the following defined terms:  "Artesian water,"                                    
"distilled water," "mineral water," "purified water," "spring                                       
water," and "well water."  The agency requested comments from                                       
interested persons on the definitions for these terms and on                                        
other terms that need to be defined.                                                                
     11.  A number of comments requested that FDA define the term                                   
"drinking water" because:  (1)  It is the most commonly used term                                   
to describe bottled water and represents 36 to 40 percent of the                                    
gallonage of bottled water sold in food stores; (2)  the lack of                                    
a Federal definition allows States to adopt special, nonuniform                                     
definitions for this segment of the bottled water market; and                                       
(3) many bottlers would have to revise their drinking water                                         
labels to remove this term to come into compliance with the                                         
standard, and doing so would impose severe economic hardships to                                    
the industry.  One comment noted that producers of 5-gallon                                         
returnable bottled water products have a very large investment in                                   
bottle inventories that are designed to last for a considerable                                     
time, and that a high percentage of these packages is permanently                                   
labeled as "drinking water."  It stated that it would be costly                                     
to dispose of these containers, and that the use of stick-on                                        
labels would present problems in its manufacturing operation.                                       
     Some comments recommended modifying paragraph                                                  
 165.110(a)(2) to define the terms "bottled water" and "drinking                                   
water" synonymously.  However, other comments stated that                                           
"drinking water" is a classification within the bottled water                                       
category along with "spring water," "mineral water," and                                            
"purified water."  These comments suggested the following                                           
definition:  "Drinking water means bottled water obtained from an                                   
approved source that has at a minimum undergone treatment                                           
consisting of filtration (activated carbon or particulate) and                                      
ozonation or an equivalent disinfection process.  Drinking water                                    
that has been treated to meet the definitions of distilled or                                       
purified water may contain added minerals for taste, provided an                                    
ingredient statement 'minerals added for taste' or optionally                                       
'minerals added for flavor' appears on the label."                                                  
     One comment stated that it is important for FDA to define                                      
drinking water as only one type of bottled water, and that the                                      
terms "drinking water" and "bottled water" not be                                                   
interchangeable.  It stated that "bottled water" includes and                                       
describes all types of bottled water products, including bottled                                    
"drinking water," but that bottled "drinking water" does not                                        
include or describe all types of "bottled water."  It stated that                                   
it is important that FDA define "drinking water" to prevent the                                     
consumer confusion that would result if this product type,                                          
already marketed to and accepted by the public, is not recognized                                   
by FDA as a specific type of bottled water.  It stated that                                         
failure to do so could, at worst, mean that products labeled as                                     
"drinking water" could no longer be sold in interstate or foreign                                   
commerce involving the United States.                                                               
     Conversely, two comments stated that the term "drinking                                        
water" should not be permitted on the label because consumers may                                   
be misled because they do not understand the meaning of the term.                                   
     The agency agrees with the comments that stated that it                                        
should define the term "drinking water."  Consumers are familiar                                    
with the term because, as the comments pointed out, products                                        
labeled as "drinking water" comprise a significant portion of the                                   
bottled water market.  In addition, not defining this term would                                    
impose an economic hardship on the bottled water industry because                                   
products labeled as "drinking water" would have to be relabeled                                     
as "bottled water."                                                                                 
     However, FDA disagrees with the comments that said that                                        
"drinking water" should be defined differently than "bottled                                        
water."  As required by the standard of quality, "bottled water"                                    
must meet certain quality requirements, or the water is                                             
substandard and must be labeled as such.  The definition for                                        
"drinking water" suggested by the comments provides an apt                                          
description of the method of processing bottled water that is                                       
used by many manufacturers.  Thus, FDA concludes that a separate                                    
definition of "drinking water" is not warranted.                                                    
     In addition, EPA has standards for "drinking water" from                                       
public water systems (40 CFR parts 141 and 143) that are nearly                                     
identical to FDA's standards for bottled water.  FDA is not aware                                   
of any reason why its standard for "drinking water" that is sold                                    
in a bottle should differ significantly from EPA's standard for                                     
"drinking water."  Therefore, the agency is including "drinking                                     
water" as an alternative name for "bottled water" in                                                
 165.110(a)(2).                                                                                    
     The agency agrees with the comments that pointed out that if                                   
minerals are added to bottled water or drinking water, an                                           
appropriate statement of identity must appear on the principal                                      
display panel of the label of the product to inform consumers of                                    
this fact (e.g., "drinking water with minerals added for taste").                                   
An ingredient statement must also appear on the label in                                            
accordance with  101.4(a).  In addition, if sodium, calcium, or                                    
iron are present in the bottled water product in more than an                                       
insignificant amount, nutrition labeling is required.                                               
     12.  One comment suggested that an alternative name for                                        
"spring water" or "well water" could be "ground water."                                             
     The agency agrees that "ground water" is an appropriate name                                   
for water from a spring or a well.  The term "ground water"                                         
encompasses not only "spring water" and "well water" but also                                       
"artesian water" and "mineral water" because by definition all of                                   
these waters come from an underground source.  A geological                                         
definition states that "ground water" is water in the saturated                                     
zone that is under a pressure equal to or greater than                                              
atmospheric pressure (Ref. 5).  The saturated zone is the                                           
subsurface zone in which all openings are full of water (id.).                                      
     Because "ground water" is an appropriate alternative term to                                   
describe some types of bottled water, and because in the January                                    
1993 proposal, the agency requested comments from interested                                        
persons on other terms that need to be defined, the agency                                          
concludes that it is within the scope of this rulemaking to                                         
define the term "ground water."  FDA concludes that the                                             
geological definition stated above is appropriate.  Therefore,                                      
the agency is defining "ground water" in  165.110(a)(2)(ii) to                                     
mean water from a subsurface saturated zone that is under a                                         
pressure equal to or greater than atmospheric pressure.  (Because                                   
the agency is establishing an additional definition in                                              
 165.110(a)(2), it is recodifying the other terms in                                               
 165.110(a)(2) so that they continue to appear in alphabetical                                     
order.)  The agency is also requiring in  165.110(a)(2)(ii) that                                   
"ground water" not be under the direct influence of surface                                         
water.  EPA defines ground water under the direct influence of                                      
surface water as any water beneath the surface of the ground                                        
with:  (1)  Significant occurrence of insects or other                                              
macroorganisms, algae, or large-diameter pathogens such as                                          
Giardia lamblia; or (2)  significant and relatively rapid shifts                                    
in water characteristics such as turbidity, temperature,                                            
conductivity, or pH which closely correlate to climatological or                                    
surface water conditions (40 CFR 141.2).  Ground water under the                                    
direct influence of surface water is not "ground water" because                                     
water that does not meet this definition is mingling with water                                     
that otherwise would meet the definition.  To clarify that ground                                   
water must not be under the direct influence of surface water,                                      
FDA concludes that this distinction should be included in the                                       
definition of "ground water."                                                                       
     13.  One comment stated that FDA should establish a separate                                   
definition for "sterilized water."  It stated that water for the                                    
initial feeding of babies has been called "sterilized water" for                                    
decades.  The comment held that all water intended for the                                          
initial feeding of infants should be commercially sterile, as                                       
defined in the low-acid canned food processing regulations (21                                      
CFR part 113).  The comment stated that to require a change in                                      
the statement of identity from "sterilized water" to "bottled                                       
water" or "purified" or "distilled water" would create confusion                                    
in hospitals and could result in nonsterilized "bottled water" or                                   
"purified" or "distilled water" being fed to newborns.  The                                         
comment suggested that the following definition be added to                                         
 165.110(a)(2)(vi):  "The name of the water intended as the                                        
initial feeding of infants may be 'sterilized water' provided it                                    
meets the definition of commercial sterility contained in 21 CFR                                    
113.3(e)(1)(i)."                                                                                    
     The agency agrees that the terms "sterile water" and                                           
"sterilized water" should be defined as a specific bottled water                                    
type.  Doing so is the logical outgrowth of FDA's request in the                                    
proposal for other terms that need to be defined.  Defining these                                   
terms will mean that the water must meet a certain minimum                                          
standard to be labeled with these terms and will allow firms to                                     
prominently label their products in the statements of identity as                                   
having been treated to achieve this standard.                                                       
     The definition of commercial sterility in  113.3(e)(1)(i)                                     
states that "commercial sterility" of thermally processed food                                      
means the condition achieved by the application of heat that                                        
renders the food free of microorganisms capable of reproducing in                                   
the food under normal nonrefrigerated conditions of storage and                                     
distribution and of viable microorganisms (including spores) of                                     
public health significance.                                                                         
     FDA notes that the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) has                                        
official monographs for "sterile water for inhalation," "sterile                                    
water for injection," and "sterile water for irrigation."  The                                      
monographs require that each of these types of water meet                                           
sterility requirements set forth by the USP (Ref. 6).  These                                        
requirements involve microbiological tests to determine the                                         
presence of viable microorganisms.  If no evidence of microbial                                     
growth is observed, the article tested meets the requirements of                                    
the test for sterility.                                                                             
     The difference between the sterility standard in                                               
 113.3(e)(1)(i) and that used by USP is that water that is                                         
commercially sterile may contain bacteria, although in an                                           
innocuous amount, whereas water that is sterile according to USP                                    
standards does not.  The agency acknowledges that water for                                         
general drinking purposes need not be sterile or even                                               
commercially sterile.  However, sterile water may be purchased by                                   
immunosuppressed individuals, contact lens wearers, infant                                          
caretakers, and laboratories with an expectation that the water                                     
is free of any bacteria.  In addition, FDA finds that it would be                                   
confusing to consumers to have two standards for sterility, one                                     
for "sterile water" and another for "sterile water, USP."                                           
     Therefore, the agency concludes that bottled water labeled                                     
as "sterile" must meet the USP definition.  Thus, FDA is defining                                   
the terms "sterile water" and "sterilized water" in                                                 
 165.110(a)(2)(vii) to mean water that meets the requirements                                      
under "Sterility Tests" <71> in the USP, 23d Revision.                                              
     14.  Several comments requested that the agency clarify                                        
whether a bottler may use any name defined in  165.110(a)(2) as                                    
long as the bottled water complies with the definition used.  One                                   
comment asked whether mineral water that contains between 250 and                                   
500 ppm TDS could be labeled as "mineral water," "mineral spring                                    
water," or "mineral well water."                                                                    
     The agency advises that if more than one term is applicable,                                   
bottlers may combine the terms, as appropriate, in naming the                                       
food (e.g., "mineral spring water, low mineral content").  Thus,                                    
bottlers will be able to label their products in an informative                                     
manner because all applicable terms can be presented prominently                                    
on the labels in the statements of identity.  Because this                                          
approach will ensure the informativeness of the statement of                                        
identity, FDA finds that it will promote honesty and fair dealing                                   
in the interest of consumers.  Therefore, FDA is revising                                           
 165.110(a)(2) to state that the name of the food is "bottled                                      
water," "drinking water," or alternatively one or more of the                                       
terms listed in that section as appropriate.                                                        
     15.  Two comments expressed concern that the proposed                                          
definitions for "artesian water," "mineral water," "spring                                          
water," and "well water" provide an opportunity for unintended                                      
mineral content manipulation that could lead to potential                                           
consumer deception.  To alleviate this problem, the comments                                        
requested that FDA revise the definitions for each of these                                         
waters to include the following:  "Artesian water (or mineral                                       
water, spring water, or well water) shall not be altered by                                         
addition or deletion of minerals or by blending it with water                                       
from a nonartesian water source."                                                                   
     FDA disagrees that the suggested revision is warranted or                                      
needed.  Once a defined bottled water product (e.g., artesian                                       
water, mineral water, spring water, or well water) has been                                         
blended with water from another source, the product no longer                                       
meets the definition of that particular type of bottled water,                                      
although it remains bottled water.  For example, if artesian                                        
water is blended with spring water to reduce the water hardness,                                    
the product is "bottled water" or "drinking water," although its                                    
labeling may state the percentages of the artesian water and                                        
spring water it contains.  Mineral water may be labeled as                                          
"mineral water" even if it is a blend of one or more waters, as                                     
long as each of the component waters complies with the source,                                      
composition, and other requirements of  165.110(a)(2)(iii).                                        
     The agency notes that mineral addition or deletion does not                                    
change the source of the water.  However, if the water has been                                     
altered significantly from the source water, under section 201(n)                                   
of the act, that the alteration has been made is a fact material                                    
in the light of representations made and must appear on the label                                   
of the product.  The water is no longer unmodified ground water                                     
and differs significantly from the water that was harvested.                                        
Therefore, the fact that the water has been altered significantly                                   
must be included in the statement of identity so that consumers                                     
are aware that the source water has been modified.  If minerals                                     
have been added, the statement of identity must state that fact.                                    
If minerals have been removed from the product, other than those                                    
that are removed during normal processing (e.g., filtration to                                      
remove precipitates), that fact must be included in the statement                                   
of identity of the product (e.g., partially demineralized)                                          
( 165.110(a)(2)(iii)).  Therefore, FDA concludes that the                                          
requested revision is not necessary.                                                                
1.  Artesian Water                                                                                  
     The agency proposed to define "artesian water" as water from                                   
a well tapping a confined aquifer in which the water level stands                                   
above the natural water table.  The agency also proposed to                                         
provide for the collection of artesian water with the assistance                                    
of an external force to enhance the natural underground pressure                                    
so long as such measures do not alter the physical properties,                                      
composition, and quality of the water.                                                              
     16.  One comment stated that FDA should not permit the use                                     
of the term "artesian" on bottled water labels because it is the                                    
most misused term in the bottled water business today.                                              
     The agency disagrees that it should prohibit the use of the                                    
name "artesian."  Because FDA is defining this term in the                                          
standard of identity for bottled water, manufacturers will have                                     
to label their products in accordance with the standard or face                                     
regulatory action.  FDA expects that misuse of the term will                                        
cease as a result.  Therefore, FDA concludes that this comment,                                     
rather than establishing why FDA should not define "artesian                                        
water," only serves to point up why defining this term will                                         
promote honesty and fair dealing in the interest of consumers,                                      
and, thus, why it is appropriate for FDA to do so.                                                  
     17.  Several comments stated that the original and                                             
vernacular meaning of "artesian water" is water that is forced                                      
from below the ground to the surface through a well by natural                                      
underground pressure and collected at or above the surface.  They                                   
recommended that this definition be adopted.                                                        
     One comment pointed out that the geologic definition that                                      
FDA referenced in the proposal actually states that "the water                                      
level in artesian wells stands at some height above the top of                                      
the aquifer but not necessarily above the land surface" and does                                    
not require that the water stand above the water table.                                             
Therefore, the comment added, the water level in an artesian well                                   
may be either above or below the water table and still be                                           
considered artesian.  The comment stated that the distinction in                                    
the geologic definition between the water table and the top of                                      
the confined aquifer is an important technical one, and that the                                    
proposed definition is much more restrictive and not the one that                                   
is generally accepted by groundwater scientists.                                                    
     The agency disagrees with the comments that contended that                                     
the water in an artesian well must flow to the surface.  As                                         
mentioned by the latter comment described above, the geologic                                       
definition states that "the water in artesian wells stands at                                       
some height above the top of the aquifer but not necessarily                                        
above the land surface" (Ref. 5).  Therefore, the geologic                                          
definition does not require that the water flow to the surface,                                     
or that, as FDA proposed (58 FR 393 at 398), the water level                                        
stand above the natural water table.  Because the agency intended                                   
that its definition for "artesian water" be the geologic                                            
definition, it is revising the definition of artesian water in                                      
 165.110(a)(2)(i) to state that bottled water that is drawn from                                   
a well tapping a confined aquifer in which the water level stands                                   
at some height above the top of the aquifer may be called                                           
"artesian water" or alternatively "artesian well water."                                            
     Concerning artesian water that flows to the surface, FDA                                       
notes that a typical geologic definition states that "if the                                        
water level in an artesian well stands above the land surface,                                      
the well is a flowing artesian well" (Ref. 5).  The agency would                                    
not object to manufacturers labeling their products accordingly,                                    
as long as it is done in a truthful and nonmisleading manner.                                       
However, the name of the food remains "artesian water" or                                           
"artesian well water."                                                                              
     18.  One comment urged that the specific name "artesian well                                   
water" be permitted on labels instead of "artesian water" to                                        
provide full disclosure to consumers.                                                               
     FDA advises that both "artesian well water" and "artesian                                      
water" can be used to identify this product because both terms                                      
appropriately describe it, and consumers would recognize either                                     
term.  "Artesian water" does indeed come from a well and only                                       
differs from "well water" in that the water comes from a confined                                   
aquifer where the water is under pressure and stands at some                                        
height above the top of the aquifer.  Therefore, FDA is modifying                                   
 165.110(a)(2)(i) to state that the name of water from a well                                      
tapping a confined aquifer in which the water level stands at                                       
some height above the top of the aquifer may be "artesian water"                                    
or "artesian well water."                                                                           
     19.  One comment asked how someone who is reviewing the                                        
label statement "artesian well water" will be able to verify that                                   
the well is actually an artesian well, meeting the definition,                                      
after the well has been bored and is in production.                                                 
     The agency agrees that there must be some means of verifying                                   
food labeling claims.  In specific instances FDA may require that                                   
records or other means of verification be provided to FDA                                           
regulatory officials, despite the act's lack of express, general                                    
statutory records access authority for foods.  The Supreme Court                                    
has recognized that FDA has authority that "is implicit in the                                      
regulatory scheme, not spelled out in haec verba" in the statute.                                   
Weinberger v. Bentex Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 412 U.S. 645, 653                                       
(1973).  Indeed, "it is a fundamental principle of administrative                                   
law that the powers of an administrative agency are not limited                                     
to those expressly granted by the statutes, but include, also,                                      
all of the powers that may fairly be implied therefrom. * * *  In                                   
the construction of a grant of powers, it is a general principle                                    
of law that where the end is required the appropriate means are                                     
given and that every grant of power carries with it the use of                                      
necessary and lawful means for its effective execution." (See                                       
Morrow v. Clayton, 326 F.2d 35, 44 (10th Cir. 1963)).                                               
     Under section 701(a) of the act (21 U.S.C. 371(a)), the                                        
agency may promulgate regulations for the efficient enforcement                                     
of the act.  Although it is possible to determine that a source                                     
of water is an artesian well after the well is in operation, in                                     
some cases it would be onerous for regulatory officials to do so.                                   
Therefore, FDA has determined that a verification requirement is                                    
necessary for the efficient enforcement of the act.  FDA has                                        
previously stated that a food manufacturer is responsible for the                                   
accuracy of its food labels (58 FR 2079, 2163, and 2165, January                                    
6, 1993).  Indeed, placing a claim in food labeling that calls                                      
the consumer's attention to a water's source is a representation                                    
that the manufacturer has evidence that the product meets the                                       
requirements for the claim.  See Thompson Medical Co., Inc. v.                                      
FTC, 791 F.d. 189, 193 (D.C. Cir. 1986), cert. denied, 479 U.S.                                     
1086 (1987).  Making a claim without such a basis would be                                          
misleading, in violation of section 403(a) of the act.                                              
     The agency anticipates that, in some instances, companies                                      
will be amenable to demonstrating to FDA the basis for the claim,                                   
regardless of the existence of these regulations.  The agency                                       
considers, however, that, when a product bears a claim based on                                     
information available solely to the manufacturer, it is                                             
reasonable for the agency to have access to that information.                                       
See United States v. An Article of Device, 731 F.d. 1253, 1261-62                                   
(7th Cir. 1984) (upholding regulation requiring makers of                                           
prescription devices to be able to prove that their devices work                                    
safely for their intended purposes and stating that "[w|here the                                    
government's access to the necessary information may be limited                                     
* * * it seems not inappropriate to put the burden of persuasion                                    
on the party who * * * presumably has better access to the                                          
relevant information"); see also Trans-American Van Service, Inc.                                   
v. United States, 421 F. Supp. 308, 331 (N.D. Tex. 1976).                                           
     Therefore, FDA is modifying  165.110(a)(2)(i) to require that                                
plants be able to demonstrate to regulatory officials that the                                      
water level of the well stands at some height above the top of                                      
the aquifer, and, thus, that the well is an artesian well.                                          
Compliance with this provision does not entail the creation of                                      
any new information or the compilation of any special records.                                      
Rather, the requirement would obligate manufacturers simply to                                      
have access to information that they should already possess, or                                     
to make a measurement of their well, and to provide FDA with this                                   
information.                                                                                        
     FDA considers this requirement to be the logical outgrowth                                     
of its January 1993 proposal.  The purpose of this rulemaking is                                    
to ensure that terms such as "artesian water" are used in a                                         
manner that promotes honesty and fair dealing (see section 401 of                                   
the act (21 U.S.C. 341)).  Such a result requires not only that                                     
these terms be appropriately defined, but that they be used in a                                    
manner that accurately describes the product.  Thus, how FDA                                        
would enforce the definitions was a matter that was within the                                      
purview of the proposal, and that the agency would provide for                                      
such enforcement in the final rule in this proceeding was                                           
reasonably foreshadowed by the proposal.  The fact that FDA                                         
received comments on how it would ensure that the defined terms                                     
are appropriately used evidences that this issue is the logical                                     
outgrowth of the proposal.                                                                          
     To comply with this requirement, producers may maintain                                        
records that demonstrate that the well is indeed an artesian                                        
well.  The manufacturer may also rely on records from the company                                   
that drilled the well.  In addition, many States and the United States Geological Survey have record
s of some wells and of the                                                                          
geology of the surrounding area.  To verify that the water is at                                    
some height above the top of the aquifer and is, thus, artesian                                     
water, the pump may be shut off, and the height or the pressure                                     
of the water in the drilled hole measured.  This information can                                    
then be used, along with information on the depth of the aquifer,                                   
to determine whether the water is artesian water.  If the source                                    
does not meet the definition of artesian water, the product must                                    
not be labeled as artesian water, or it is misbranded under                                         
sections 403(a), 403(b), and 403(g) of the act.                                                     
     20.  One comment stated that water chemistry changes as                                        
wells are pumped, and that the larger the drawdown, the greater                                     
the water chemistry may change.  It stated that a mineralogical                                     
analysis from a water sample taken at 10 gallons per minute (gpm)                                   
may be quite different than one taken at 500 gpm for the same                                       
well.  The comment added that there would be an ongoing burden on                                   
FDA to verify that water produced by bottlers drawing on                                            
"artesian" groundwater resources remains constant in water                                          
chemistry.                                                                                          
     FDA agrees with the comment.  The use of external force may                                    
alter the physical properties, composition, and quality of the                                      
water, although usually not significantly, depending on the rate                                    
of extraction, because of changes in the pressure of the water as                                   
it is extracted.  This fact is the basis on which the agency                                        
proposed to require that the use of external force not alter                                        
these characteristics (58 FR 393 at 398).  However, because the                                     
rate of extraction from the use of external force could vary from                                   
day to day or even hour to hour, the characteristics of the water                                   
can be also altered.                                                                                
     As discussed in the previous comment, the agency is                                            
requiring that the manufacturer demonstrate that the source of                                      
the water is indeed an artesian source.  However, the agency does                                   
not deem it necessary to require that the definition for artesian                                   
water extend to the physical properties, composition, and quality                                   
of the water.  In fact, as long as the source is demonstrated to                                    
be an artesian source that meets the definition in                                                  
 165.110(a)(2)(i), the actual characteristics of the water are a                                   
quality control concern for the manufacturer rather than an                                         
attribute that defines artesian water.  As stated previously, the                                   
agency intends that its definition of artesian water be the                                         
geological definition.  The geological definition does not take                                     
into consideration the composition of the water.  Therefore, the                                    
agency is removing the requirement in  165.110(a)(2)(i) that the                                   
use of external force in the extraction of artesian water not                                       
alter the physical properties, composition, and quality of the                                      
water.                                                                                              
2.  Mineral Water                                                                                   
     The agency proposed that water coming from a source tapped                                     
at one or more bore holes or springs, originating from a                                            
geologically and physically protected underground water source,                                     
may be called "mineral water."  FDA further proposed that mineral                                   
water be distinguished from other types of water by its constant                                    
level of minerals and trace elements at the point it emerges from                                   
the source.                                                                                         
     The agency tentatively concluded in the proposal that it                                       
would be contradictory for bottled water that has essentially no                                    
minerals and does not perform (e.g., taste) like mineral water to                                   
be labeled as mineral water.  Consistent with this tentative                                        
conclusion, FDA proposed that "mineral water" be defined as water                                   
containing not less than 250 ppm TDS.  The agency requested                                         
comments on the proposed minimum level of 250 ppm TDS in mineral                                    
water and stated that if it received substantive data to support                                    
another minimum level, it would consider issuing a final rule                                       
with a different minimum level.                                                                     
     21.  A number of comments objected to FDA establishing a                                       
minimum TDS level for mineral water.  The comments argued that                                      
establishing such a level would be arbitrary and contrary to the                                    
most current mineral water definitions, including international                                     
definitions which do not include a minimum level, and would                                         
prohibit many brands from being labeled as mineral water, thereby                                   
adversely affecting consumer sales with no apparent benefit to                                      
consumers.                                                                                          
     Conversely, other comments suggested raising the minimum TDS                                   
level to 500 ppm.  These comments argued that establishing the                                      
minimum TDS at the higher level would:  (1)  Make it closer to                                      
the definition that has been adopted by most States that have                                       
bottled water regulations and to the definition that is currently                                   
being considered by the Canadian government; (2)  provide the                                       
basis for identification of the term "mineral water" with the                                       
distinctive taste of a higher mineral content; (3)  be less                                         
confusing to consumers in that it would not allow the same water                                    
to be marketed under several names (e.g., "mineral water, low                                       
mineral content" or "spring water"); and (4)  simplify                                              
application of the quality standards and the label identity                                         
statement.                                                                                          
     Several comments expressed the view that mineral water is                                      
ground water with at least 50 ppm TDS, while several other                                          
comments supported the proposed minimum level of 250 ppm TDS in                                     
mineral water.  One of these comments stated that waters having a                                   
TDS of 250 ppm or more generally have a distinctive flavor.  Two                                    
comments, however, stated that actual taste thresholds for                                          
mineral water are often in the range of 100 ppm TDS.  One of                                        
these comments stated that consumer identification and                                              
differentiation among the flavors of various individual source                                      
waters, which result from naturally occurring mineral variations                                    
in the water, is clearly possible below the proposed threshold of                                   
250 ppm TDS.                                                                                        
     The agency acknowledges that many different definitions                                        
exist for "mineral water."  In the January 1993 proposal, the                                       
agency compared several current definitions, including State and                                    
European standards, in arriving at its proposed definition (58 FR                                   
393 at 396).  International standards vary from requiring at                                        
least 500 ppm TDS (Canadian Province of Quebec) to no minimum                                       
requirement (ERCS).  In a like manner, different States have                                        
different requirements.  Therefore, no FDA action will harmonize                                    
existing State and international regulations.                                                       
     As stated in the proposal (58 FR 393 at 397), the minimum                                      
level of 250 ppm TDS for mineral water is based on the apparent                                     
consumer expectation that a product identified as "mineral water"                                   
will contain at least a minimum level of minerals.  The agency                                      
tentatively concluded that it would be misleading for bottled                                       
water that has essentially no minerals, and that does not perform                                   
(e.g., taste) like mineral water, to be labeled as mineral water.                                   
The minimum level that FDA proposed, 250 ppm TDS, is in agreement                                   
with the Association of Food and Drug Officials (AFDO) definition                                   
(Ref. 7) for light mineral water and mineral water.                                                 
     The main characteristic of mineral water is, as its name                                       
implies, the presence of a significant quantity of minerals.                                        
Other important characteristics (Ref. 8) are that it be from a                                      
geologically and physically protected underground water source,                                     
and that it contain a constant level of minerals and trace                                          
elements at its point of emergence from the source.  Mineral                                        
water may come from a spring or a well, including an artesian                                       
well, but must contain a significant amount of minerals.  The                                       
agency considers 250 ppm TDS as a significant amount of minerals                                    
because at this level, the minerals, depending on the specific                                      
mineral content, begin to impart a particular taste to the water.                                   
Although minerals may impart some taste below this level, it is                                     
not the significant mineral taste that is characteristic of                                         
mineral water.                                                                                      
     FDA recognizes that mineral water from a spring that                                           
contains between 250 and 500 ppm TDS may be identified as "spring                                   
water," "mineral water, low mineral content," or both.  However,                                    
FDA disagrees that the availability of these terms will cause                                       
consumer confusion because such a product meets the definitions                                     
of both "mineral water" and "spring water" in                                                       
 165.110(a)(2)(iii) and (a)(2)(vi), and both terms appropriately                                   
describe the product.  As discussed previously (see comment 14 of                                   
this document), use of all applicable terms presented prominently                                   
on the label in the statement of identity is appropriate because                                    
it will ensure the informativeness of the statement of identity.                                    
     FDA realizes that brands previously sold as "mineral water"                                    
that contain less than 250 ppm TDS will not be provided for under                                   
 165.110 as "mineral water."  However, the brands mentioned in                                     
the comments are not being sold in the United States as mineral                                     
water but as other types of bottled water (e.g., spring water)                                      
because of the many State requirements that mineral water contain                                   
greater than 500 ppm TDS.  Thus, although some of these brands                                      
cannot be labeled as "mineral water," other brands that                                             
previously could not be labeled as "mineral water" and sold in                                      
some States now meet the definition of "mineral water" in                                           
 165.110(a)(2)(iii) and can be labeled and sold as such.                                           
     Moreover, the agency has not been persuaded that this                                          
regulation will adversely influence consumer sales or put some                                      
bottled mineral water producers at a disadvantage as compared to                                    
others.  The comments did not provide any information on such                                       
adverse consequences, and the agency is not aware of these                                          
adverse effects.                                                                                    
     Therefore, for the reasons discussed above, FDA concludes                                      
that establishing a minimum level of TDS in mineral water is                                        
reasonable, and that the proposed level of 250 ppm TDS is the                                       
appropriate level.                                                                                  
     22.  One comment remarked that some bottled waters would not                                   
significantly differ from a mineral water slightly above the 250                                    
ppm TDS minimum.  Another comment stated that if companies wish                                     
to market their products on the basis of the mineral content,                                       
they can do so through a TDS disclosure statement on the                                            
principal display panel regardless of the amount present.                                           
Therefore, there would be no need to establish a minimum TDS                                        
level for mineral water.                                                                            
     Several comments declared that each mineral water product is                                   
unique because of its particular composition of minerals, and                                       
that this unique character imparts distinctive flavor.  These                                       
comments stated that some water products with a constant mineral                                    
content of less than 250 ppm TDS might have a distinctive flavor                                    
and should be called "mineral water--very low mineral content" or                                   
"mineral light."                                                                                    
     Comments also stated that establishing a level of 250 ppm                                      
TDS is contrary to the industry's belief that the overall mineral                                   
content is less important than the level of each particular                                         
mineral.                                                                                            
     The agency agrees that some waters that contain slightly                                       
less than the 250 ppm TDS minimum would not significantly differ                                    
from a mineral water slightly above the minimum.  Any minimum                                       
level that the agency establishes will preclude some waters from                                    
bearing the term "mineral water" even though they do not vary                                       
significantly from waters that are above the minimum.  FDA also                                     
agrees that there is a taste aspect to the presence of minerals,                                    
although some minerals may contribute a more distinct flavor to                                     
the water than others.  For example, in sufficient amounts,                                         
sodium chloride gives water a salty taste, and sulfate                                              
contributes a bitter taste (Ref. 5).  In fact, a common industry                                    
practice is to add minerals to some bottled waters for the flavor                                   
that they contribute.                                                                               
     However, a minimum requirement for TDS is necessary to                                         
ensure that when consumers purchase a product labeled as "mineral                                   
water," the product contains minerals at a level that justifies                                     
calling the product by that name.  As explained in response to                                      
the previous comment, that level is 250 ppm TDS.  The minimum TDS                                   
requirement for mineral water will not preclude a product that                                      
contains less than 250 ppm TDS from being marketed under another                                    
name, such as "ground water," "spring water," or "well water," as                                   
applicable, or from being called "bottled water."  In addition,                                     
manufacturers may include a truthful statement of the TDS level                                     
on the label of any bottled water product.  Thus, even though FDA                                   
has carefully considered these comments, it concludes that it is                                    
appropriate to establish a minimum TDS requirement for "mineral                                     
water."                                                                                             
     23.  One comment stated that the definition for "mineral                                       
water" should include all water containing over 500 ppm TDS and                                     
argued that whether it occurs naturally or is constructed (as are                                   
other food products) is irrelevant.  The comment added that if                                      
mineral solids are added, FDA should require that such additions                                    
be noted on the label.                                                                              
     Another comment stated that it is essential that the                                           
definition be clear that mineral water may not be altered by the                                    
addition or deletion of minerals.  The comment stated that                                          
mineral water should not be water that is derived from a public                                     
water supply and to which minerals are then added.                                                  
     FDA disagrees with the comment that advocated that water to                                    
which minerals have been added should be eligible to be called                                      
"mineral water."  The agency has reviewed a number of State and                                     
foreign standards, and none define "mineral water" as containing                                    
added minerals (Ref. 8).  In fact, many of these standards define                                   
water with added minerals as a different type of bottled water,                                     
distinct from "mineral water."  Therefore, the agency concludes                                     
that the definition for "mineral water" should not be revised to                                    
permit the addition of minerals.                                                                    
     The agency agrees with the comment that stated that the                                        
addition of minerals should be clearly prohibited in the                                            
definition for mineral water.  The definition for mineral water                                     
has geological as well as compositional factors.  The amounts and                                   
types of minerals in mineral water is a result of the path that                                     
the water has traveled underground.  Therefore, to clarify that                                     
the minerals present in mineral water must be from the                                              
underground source and not added to the water after extraction,                                     
FDA is modifying the definition of mineral water in                                                 
 165.110(a)(2)(iii) to specifically preclude the addition of                                       
minerals.                                                                                           
     However, some mineral waters as extracted from their                                           
geological source, may contain high levels of some undesirable                                      
minerals (e.g., arsenic, precipitated manganese).  In some                                          
instances, the water can be treated to selectively remove these                                     
undesirable elements.  FDA is aware of no reason why it should                                      
preclude the removal of these undesirable elements, or why such                                     
removal should preclude the manufacturer from labeling the                                          
product as "mineral water" as long as all other requirements                                        
(e.g., source and composition) of the definition are met.                                           
Section 165.110(a)(2)(iii) provides accordingly.                                                    
     24.  Several comments requested that FDA more precisely                                        
define "mineral water" in that the agency should require that the                                   
level and relative proportions of minerals and trace elements                                       
remain constant.  Comments stated that such a requirement would                                     
harmonize the definition of mineral water with the European                                         
Community and Codex concepts.  These comments suggested the                                         
following definition:  "Mineral water shall be distinguished from                                   
other types of water by its constant level and relative                                             
proportions of minerals and trace elements, at the point of                                         
emergence from the source, due account being taken of the cycles                                    
of natural fluctuations."  One comment added that this wording                                      
recognizes that minor natural fluctuations occur with any source                                    
water.                                                                                              
     Some comments requested that the agency clarify that, in the                                   
term "constant level of minerals," the "level" is not the                                           
characteristic element.  They stated that what is fundamental is                                    
the "constancy" or "stability" of the mineral composition, which                                    
acts more as a fingerprint of the water rather than as a measure                                    
of the overall total dissolved solids content.                                                      
     One comment stated that all ground water (well or spring)                                      
has a constant level of minerals and trace elements as it emerges                                   
from the source.  The comment questioned the scientific basis of                                    
FDA's approach.                                                                                     
     The agency agrees that it needs to clarify its definition of                                   
mineral water.  In the proposal (58 FR 393 at 396), FDA stated                                      
that mineral waters may have very different flavors depending on                                    
the mineral content and types of minerals and trace elements                                        
present in the water.  Consumers may purchase a particular                                          
mineral water from a particular source because of the flavor                                        
contributed by the mineral content.  It is important to consumers                                   
that the mineral composition of a particular source remain                                          
constant.  FDA considers that industry and consumers have come to                                   
expect that mineral water has a fairly stable mineral                                               
composition.  Therefore, FDA proposed that mineral water be                                         
distinguished from other types of water by the constant level of                                    
minerals and trace elements in the water as it emerges from its                                     
source.                                                                                             
     FDA further notes that the ERCS defines "natural mineral                                       
water" as being characterized by its content of certain mineral                                     
salts and their relative proportions and by the presence of trace                                   
elements or other constituents (Ref. 1).  The ERCS also states                                      
that mineral water is characterized by the constancy of its                                         
composition, the stability of its discharge, and its temperature,                                   
due account being taken of the cycles of natural fluctuations.                                      
     As stated previously, the composition and concentration of                                     
substances dissolved in ground water depend on the chemical                                         
composition of precipitation, on the biologic and chemical                                          
reactions occurring on the land surface and in the soil zone, and                                   
on the mineral composition of the aquifers and confining beds                                       
through which the water moves (Ref. 5).  Thus, under constant                                       
conditions, the mineral content of ground water will be constant.                                   
There are certain natural factors that may affect the constancy                                     
of a source such as occurrence of earthquakes and long term                                         
climatic changes.  These natural factors do not preclude the                                        
water from qualifying as mineral water as long as the water                                         
continues to meet the compositional requirements in                                                 
 165.110(a)(2)(iii).                                                                               
     Therefore, to clarify the importance of the relative                                           
proportion of minerals and trace elements, and to take into                                         
account the cycles of natural fluctuations, FDA concludes that                                      
modification of the definition of mineral water, along the lines                                    
requested by the comments, is appropriate.  The modification                                        
reflects the fact that there may be some minor variation in                                         
mineral water over time, and that absolute amounts of minerals in                                   
the water may change slightly.  Thus, the agency is modifying                                       
 165.110(a)(2)(iii) to state that mineral water shall be                                           
distinguished from other types of water not only by its constant                                    
level of minerals and trace elements at the point of emergence                                      
from the source, but also by its relative proportions of these                                      
substances, due account being taken of the cycles of natural                                        
fluctuations.  Natural fluctuations in mineral content may occur,                                   
but these fluctuations must not affect the relative proportions                                     
of minerals and trace elements.  Samples of mineral water can be                                    
compared to ensure that major dissolved mineral contents are the                                    
same using several scientific methods, such as the Stiff diagram                                    
and the Piper trilinear diagram (Ref. 9).                                                           
     25.  Two comments urged FDA to amend the proposed definition                                   
for "mineral water" to require that if mineral water is taken                                       
from a bore hole tapping a spring, it be from the same                                              
underground stratum, and be of the same quality and composition,                                    
as the water derived from the natural orifice.                                                      
     The comments seem to be arguing that any product drawn from                                    
a spring must meet the requirements for "spring water."  However,                                   
this is not the case.  A product need only meet the requirements                                    
for the term used to name it.  Thus, a product labeled as                                           
"mineral water" need only meet the requirements in                                                  
 165.110(a)(2)(iii).  It need not meet the definition for                                          
"spring water" unless its label claims that the water is also                                       
spring water.  If the product were, however, to claim to be                                         
"mineral spring water," it must meet the definition of spring                                       
water in  165.110(a)(2)(v) as well as that for "mineral water."                                    
     26.  One comment noted that the proposed definition of                                         
mineral water refers to water "* * * originating from a                                             
geologically and physically protected underground water source."                                    
The comment stated that this phrase appears to be ambiguous and                                     
meaningless because there is no indication in the definition of                                     
what would constitute protection.  It stated that the terminology                                   
seems to offer the consumer some assurance of purity that may not                                   
be warranted.  The comment asserted that every ground water                                         
source inherently possesses some degree of geologic and physical                                    
protection by the very fact that it is underground.  It stated                                      
that there are no operational means to differentiate a protected                                    
underground water source from an unprotected one.                                                   
     The agency agrees that every ground water source inherently                                    
possesses some degree of geologic and physical protection by the                                    
very fact that it is underground.  However, some underground                                        
water sources are not protected.  This lack of protection is                                        
evidenced by the fact that some underground sources are under the                                   
direct influence of surface water.  As discussed earlier (see                                       
comment 12 of this document), EPA defines ground water under the                                    
direct influence of surface water as any water beneath the                                          
surface of the ground with:  (1)  Significant occurrence of                                         
insects or other macroorganisms, algae, or large-diameter                                           
pathogens such as Giardia lamblia; or (2)  significant and                                          
relatively rapid shifts in water characteristics such as                                            
turbidity, temperature, conductivity, or pH that closely                                            
correlate to climatological or surface water conditions (40 CFR                                     
141.2).                                                                                             
     The latter part of EPA's definition pertains to changes in                                     
the physical characteristics of the water.  Changes in these                                        
physical characteristics can have a significant influence on the                                    
mineral composition of the water.  Because the definition of                                        
"mineral water" is geological as well as compositional, the                                         
agency concludes that it is important that "mineral water" be                                       
from a physically protected underground water source.  Mineral                                      
water has been traditionally distinguished from other types of                                      
water by its constant level, and relative proportions, of                                           
minerals and trace elements at the point of emergence from the                                      
source, due account being taken of the cycles of natural                                            
fluctuations.  This distinction is a reflection of the fact that,                                   
traditionally, the mineral composition of products labeled as                                       
mineral water does not vary significantly over time.  Therefore,                                    
it is important that mineral water come from a geologically                                         
protected underground source, so that the mineral water retains                                     
its distinctive mineral content.                                                                    
     FDA does not agree, however, that there are no operational                                     
means to differentiate a protected underground water source from                                    
an unprotected one.  The presence of insects or other                                               
macroorganisms as well as changes in physical characteristics are                                   
measurable.  Thus, regulatory officials can determine whether                                       
mineral water is from a geologically and physically protected                                       
underground source.                                                                                 
     27.  One comment stated that the label statement "mineral                                      
water" will lead some consumers to believe that the food contains                                   
a nutritionally significant amount of minerals.  It stated that                                     
this perception will occur even if the food is labeled "low                                         
mineral content," because "low" is a relative term and not a                                        
quantitative term.  Therefore, the comment asserted that all                                        
bottled water labeled as "mineral water" should also bear                                           
nutrition labeling or a statement such as, "Not a significant                                       
source of ______," with the blank being filled in with the names                                    
of any essential minerals that are missing or present in                                            
insignificant amounts.                                                                              
     One comment asked whether the statement of identity for                                        
"mineral water" or "mineralized water" would constitute a health                                    
claim and, thus, trigger full nutrition disclosure, even in                                         
abbreviated form.  Another comment stated that use of the term                                      
"mineral water" should not require additional nutrition                                             
information.                                                                                        
     The agency stated in the preamble to the January 1993                                          
proposal (58 FR 393 at 404), that its tentative view was that                                       
nutrition labeling should appear on bottled water labeled as                                        
"mineral water, high mineral content" because consumers may                                         
assume that water with a high mineral content would be of                                           
nutritional benefit.  In addition, mineral water with a high                                        
mineral content could contain enough sodium, calcium, or iron to                                    
make nutrition labeling mandatory.  Under  101.9, foods that                                       
contain more than an insignificant amount of the nutrients or                                       
food components that are required to be listed, or whose label,                                     
labeling, or advertising contains a nutrient content claim or any                                   
other nutrition information, must bear nutrition labeling.                                          
     Nutrients likely to be present in bottled water products in                                    
amounts that could trigger nutrition labeling are calcium,                                          
sodium, and iron.  If any of these minerals are present in a                                        
product in more than insignificant amounts, nutrition labeling is                                   
required under section 403(q) of the act.  More than an                                             
insignificant amount of calcium is 20 mg or more per labeled                                        
serving, more than an insignificant amount of sodium is 5 mg or                                     
more per labeled serving, and more than an insignificant amount                                     
of iron is 0.36 mg or more per labeled serving ( 101.9(c)(8)).                                     
The reference amount customarily consumed for bottled water is                                      
240 milliliter (mL) ( 101.12(b)).                                                                  
     The agency has considered whether the term "mineral water"                                     
is an implied nutrient content claim, and whether, as a result,                                     
nutrition labeling should be mandatory on any product labeled as                                    
"mineral water" regardless of the level of required nutrients.                                      
In the FEDERAL REGISTER of January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2302 at 2369),                                    
the agency concluded that when an ingredient constitutes                                            
essentially 100 percent of the food, so that the name of the                                        
ingredient is the statement of identity, the name of the                                            
ingredient does not constitute an implied nutrient content claim,                                   
even though in other contexts, reference to the ingredient could                                    
constitute such a claim (see  101.65(b)(4)).  For example, when                                    
the name of the ingredient constitutes the common or usual name                                     
of the product, as described in  102.5 (21 CFR 102.5), or the                                      
identity of the commodity, as described in  101.3 (e.g., "canola                                   
oil"), it is not a nutrient content claim.  In such a context,                                      
the name of the ingredient does not imply that a nutrient is                                        
present in a certain amount, but rather, it describes the nature                                    
of the product.  However, the claim "made only with canola oil"                                     
does characterize the level of a nutrient in the food.  This                                        
claim represents an implied claim that the food is low in                                           
saturated fat ( 101.65(c)).                                                                        
     The term "mineral water," when used as the statement of                                        
identity of the food, does not trigger nutrition labeling because                                   
it does not make a representation, either explicit or implied,                                      
about the level of nutrients in the food.  "Mineral water" is                                       
simply the name of the food.  Although the term "mineral water"                                     
indicates that the water contains a significant amount of                                           
minerals, it does not imply that these minerals are nutrients.                                      
In fact, not all of the total dissolved solids in mineral water                                     
are nutrients (e.g., bicarbonates).  However, labeling claims                                       
that imply the presence or absence of any nutrient in bottled                                       
water would trigger nutrition labeling.                                                             
     The major dissolved inorganic constituents of ground water                                     
are sodium, magnesium, calcium, chloride, bicarbonate, and                                          
sulfate.  The total concentration of these major ions comprises                                     
more than 90 percent of the TDS in the water (Ref. 9).  The                                         
presence of 83 ppm calcium or 21 ppm sodium or more will trigger                                    
nutrition labeling.  Therefore, because mineral water must                                          
contain at least 250 ppm TDS, it is likely that many mineral                                        
waters, especially high-mineral-content mineral waters, will                                        
contain enough calcium or sodium that the labels of these                                           
products must bear nutrition labeling.                                                              
     The agency does not agree with the comment that asserted                                       
that consumers will be led to believe that the food is a                                            
significant source of minerals if the food is labeled "low                                          
mineral content."  Use of the term "low" does not suggest that                                      
minerals are present in a significant amount.  The term "low," as                                   
used in the statement of identity of the product, is not used in                                    
a dietary context.  It is simply a qualitative term used as part                                    
of the name of the food to describe the food.  Thus, use of the                                     
term "low mineral content" would not indicate that the mineral                                      
water was a significant source of minerals.                                                         
     Therefore, for the reasons discussed above, FDA concludes                                      
that consumers will not be misled that mineral water contains                                       
more than a nutritionally insignificant amount of minerals, and                                     
nutrition labeling of all mineral water is not required.                                            
     28.  Several comments stated that the product should be                                        
labeled as "inorganic mineral water" because all minerals found                                     
in water are in an inorganic state.  They stated that the                                           
inorganic minerals found in water are only substances that have                                     
been dissolved by the water itself.  The comments stated that fruits or vegetables take in inorganic
 material through their                                                                             
roots to become organic and readily accepted by the body's cells.                                   
They stated that not labeling the product as "inorganic mineral                                     
water" is misleading to consumers.  Additionally the comments                                       
noted that many of the so-called "minerals" found in mineral                                        
water are not minerals at all but are in fact inorganic                                             
chemicals.  They urged FDA to require the label to read:                                            
"Inorganic mineral & inorganic chemical content _________ ppm                                       
TDS."                                                                                               
     FDA disagrees with the comment.  Minerals by definition are                                    
inorganic elements or chemicals in any food (Ref. 10).  Thus, the                                   
term "inorganic" is not a material fact that must be disclosed in                                   
labeling mineral water because the term "mineral" means that the                                    
water contains inorganic chemicals.  While the agency recognizes                                    
that some minerals that are also nutrients may be more                                              
bioavailable in some foods than in mineral water (e.g., calcium                                     
in milk), the comments did not provide any data to substantiate                                     
their claim that inorganic nutrients taken into plants                                              
systemically are more bioavailable than the same nutrients in                                       
water.                                                                                              
     In regards to a required label statement concerning TDS, as                                    
will be discussed later in this final rule, FDA does not require                                    
that the TDS appear on the label of any bottled water product,                                      
and the comments have not provided substantive grounds to do so.                                    
However, firms may include this information on the label of                                         
bottled water in a truthful and nonmisleading manner, including                                     
in the manner suggested by the comment if the firm so chooses.                                      
3.  Purified Water                                                                                  
     The agency proposed that water that is produced by                                             
distillation, deionization, reverse osmosis, or other suitable                                      
processes, and that meets the definition of "purified water" in                                     
the most recent edition of the USP, can be labeled as "purified                                     
water."  FDA also proposed that if the water is produced by                                         
distillation and meets the USP standard, alternatively it may be                                    
called "distilled water."                                                                           
     29.  Two comments stated that the term "purified water"                                        
should not be permitted on labels because consumers do not                                          
understand its specific meaning and, thus, may be confused by the                                   
use of this term.  They requested that only the following                                           
specific names be permitted on labels in order to give full                                         
disclosure to the consumer:  "Distilled water," "reverse osmosis                                    
water," and "deionized water."                                                                      
     FDA disagrees with these comments.  The agency proposed that                                   
the name "purified water" be defined as water that has been                                         
processed to meet the requirements of the USP definition for                                        
"purified water."  An alternative name for water processed by                                       
distillation and that meets the USP standard is "distilled                                          
water."  "Purified water" and "distilled water" meeting the USP                                     
definition have been marketed under these names for many years,                                     
and the comments did not provide any evidence that consumers do                                     
not understand the meaning of these terms.  Therefore, the agency                                   
is aware of no basis on which to conclude that these terms will                                     
confuse consumers.  The agency views this rulemaking as                                             
standardizing the use of these terms, not introducing new terms                                     
into the market.  Manufacturers may include more specific                                           
information concerning the method of preparation of these bottled                                   
water products on the label.  Therefore, the comments have not                                      
persuaded the agency to alter its approach to the use of these                                      
terms.                                                                                              
     However, the agency agrees that the terms "reverse osmosis                                     
water" and "deionized water" are appropriate alternative names                                      
for purified water because these terms describe how water is                                        
processed to produce purified or distilled water.  Therefore, FDA                                   
is modifying  165.110(a)(2)(iv) to provide for the alternative                                     
term "deionized water" if the water has been processed by                                           
deionization, and "reverse osmosis water" if the water has been                                     
processed by reverse osmosis.                                                                       
     30.  Several comments objected to FDA's proposal that                                          
"purified water" meet the USP definition because:  (1)  Water for                                   
human consumption does not need to be pharmaceutical grade water;                                   
(2)  USP methods of analyses for bottled water are different from                                   
EPA and FDA methods; and  (3)  the regulation would automatically                                   
adopt future updates of the USP, thus, providing the publisher of                                   
the USP with lawmaking power without any formal comment or review                                   
mechanism.  Comments asked that FDA delete any reference to the                                     
USP in  165.110(a)(2)(iv).  Some of the comments recommended                                       
that FDA establish specific standards for purified water rather                                     
than adopt the USP standard by reference.                                                           
     One comment stated that a standard for purified drinking                                       
water should require the use of "distillation, deionization,                                        
reverse osmosis, or other suitable processes" and impose a water                                    
conductivity testing requirement with a conductivity maximum                                        
allowable threshold level of 30 microsiemen per centimeter.  It                                     
stated that the conductivity test, which would measure the ionic                                    
strength of water based on a customarily used reverse osmosis                                       
system, would verify the purification process.  Another comment                                     
stated that "purified water" should only be required to meet the                                    
current USP requirements for total solids, pH, and chloride.                                        
     FDA is persuaded by the comments that the definition of                                        
purified water should not be bound "to the most recent" USP                                         
standard as it proposed to do.  However, the agency does conclude                                   
that the definition should use the USP standard because purified                                    
water meeting this standard has been sold for years and is an                                       
established product.  Although water for human consumption does                                     
not need to be pharmaceutical grade, water that is labeled as                                       
"purified water" should meet stricter standards than other types                                    
of bottled water because the term "purified" asserts that the                                       
product has been processed to be of a purer quality than other                                      
types of water.  Therefore, requiring that "purified water" meet                                    
a USP definition ensures that the water meets a stricter standard                                   
than other types of bottled water.                                                                  
     FDA recognizes that it would be a burden for manufacturers                                     
producing purified water and other types of bottled water to have                                   
to use different methods of analysis (USP and EPA) to test for                                      
the same contaminant.  Bottlers may use EPA methods to test their                                   
purified water, although the agency notes that it will use USP                                      
methods to check for compliance.  However, FDA points out that                                      
most of the USP methods do not provide a numerical water quality                                    
requirement that would parallel EPA methods but instead require                                     
testing with a positive or negative result.  Thus, the methods                                      
may not be easily interchangeable.                                                                  
     FDA concludes that the requirement should remain as proposed                                   
because the term "purified water" explicitly asserts that the                                       
water has been purified, and the USP definition is a commonly                                       
used standard for what constitutes purification.  This common use                                   
is evidenced by the fact that AFDO's definition of "purified                                        
water" is the USP definition (Ref. 7).  However, FDA agrees that                                    
interested persons should have an opportunity to comment on any                                     
proposed change in the standard of identity for purified water.                                     
Therefore, FDA is referencing a specific edition of the USP                                         
monograph in the definition of "purified water"                                                     
( 165.110(a)(2)(iv)).  The agency is defining "purified water"                                     
as water that has been produced by distillation, deionization,                                      
reverse osmosis, or other suitable processes and that meets the                                     
definition of purified water in the USP, 23d Revision.                                              
     The agency notes that the USP is in the process of updating                                    
its monograph for purified water.  One such revision may be a                                       
water conductivity test requirement as mentioned by one of the                                      
comments.  As modifications are made to the USP definition, FDA                                     
will consider amending its definition for purified water to                                         
reflect the modification.                                                                           
     The agency notes that any bottled water that is labeled as                                     
"purified water, USP," or that indicates in any manner that the                                     
product meets USP specifications, must, in addition to complying                                    
with FDA regulations, meet the most recent USP standard, or the                                     
product will be misbranded under section 403(a)(1) of the act in                                    
that its labeling will be false in this particular.                                                 
     31.  One comment asked that FDA explicitly designate the                                       
product as "purified drinking water" and, as a food product,                                        
differentiate it from "purified water, USP" usable for                                              
pharmaceutical purposes.  The comment stated that a change in                                       
nomenclature from "purified water" to "purified drinking water"                                     
would reduce any potential for confusion between purified water                                     
that is suitable for use in preparation of compendial dosage                                        
forms and purified drinking water for potable purposes.  It                                         
stated that the qualification would make clear to the public that                                   
products labeled as "purified drinking water" are not represented                                   
as, and do not purport to be, in compliance with the USP                                            
monograph for "purified water."                                                                     
     The agency disagrees that the term "purified water" should                                     
be replaced by "purified drinking water" in the standard of                                         
identity.  Many products that are currently being sold as                                           
"purified water" for drinking purposes meet the USP definition                                      
for "purified water," and FDA is not aware of any evidence of                                       
public confusion.  Thus, FDA concludes that "purified water"                                        
remains an appropriate name.                                                                        
     However, "purified drinking water" and "distilled drinking                                     
water" are appropriate alternative names for the product because                                    
these name will enable consumers to identify the product as water                                   
for drinking purposes that has been processed to meet stricter                                      
purity standards.  Therefore, FDA is modifying                                                      
 165.110(a)(2)(iv) to provide for alternative terms that                                           
describe the product as a type of drinking water (e.g., "purified                                   
drinking water").                                                                                   
     32.  One comment recommended that FDA establish a definition                                   
for "demineralized water" as follows:  "The name of water                                           
demineralized by distillation, reverse osmosis, or other method                                     
so that it contains not more than 10 ppm TDS may be                                                 
'demineralized water.'"                                                                             
     The agency agrees that "demineralized water" is an                                             
appropriate name for water that has been processed to                                               
significantly decrease its mineral content.  However, FDA                                           
concludes that there is no need to establish a separate                                             
definition for "demineralized water" because the USP definition                                     
for "purified water" encompasses water that has been                                                
demineralized by distillation, reverse osmosis, or other method                                     
and that contains not more than 10 ppm TDS.  Therefore, the                                         
agency is including the term "demineralized water" as an                                            
alternative name for "purified water" in  165.110(a)(2)(iv).                                       
     33.  One comment recommended the establishment of a                                            
heterotrophic bacteria standard for purified water.  It stated                                      
that, although the health risks from such bacteria may be small,                                    
a higher expectation exists for a product labeled as "purified"                                     
than for other bottled water products.  The comment stated that                                     
purified water is purchased by immunosuppressed individuals,                                        
contact lens wearers, mothers of small infants, laboratories, and                                   
others with an expectation of purity from general bacteria.  The                                    
comment recommended a limit of no more than 500 bacteria per                                        
milliliter for purified water because this standard will limit                                      
the suppression of coliform detection and reduce the exposure and                                   
dosage level for organisms that might have a health effect on at-risk groups.  The comment also reco
mmended that, if FDA does not                                                                       
establish a general bacteria standard for "purified water," the                                     
agency substitute the name "demineralized water" for "purified                                      
water" so as not to mislead consumers.                                                              
     FDA disagrees with the comment.  Traditionally, water that                                     
is essentially free of chemical impurities is called "purified                                      
water," and water that is free of microorganisms is called                                          
"sterile" or "sterilized water."  This distinction is evidenced                                     
by the fact that there are USP monographs for "sterile water" and                                   
for "purified water" that distinguish between the two types of                                      
water (Ref. 6).  Thus, the labeling of a product as "purified                                       
water" does not imply that it is sterile water.                                                     
     USP has established a general guideline for purified water                                     
for pharmaceutical purposes of 100 colony-forming units per mL.                                     
This level evidences that the water has been treated                                                
appropriately, even though bacteria are present at low levels.                                      
Purified water that has been treated by distillation or reverse                                     
osmosis may be sterile if appropriately processed.  However, the                                    
agency points out that purified water is typically low in the                                       
nutrients required by microorganisms for growth, and, thus,                                         
ordinarily has low bacterial counts.  Adherence to the                                              
regulations in part 129 significantly reduces the risk of                                           
contamination.  Therefore, "purified water," if appropriately                                       
processed as required by part 129, should contain less than the                                     
comment's requested 500 bacteria per mL.  The agency consequently                                   
concludes that the establishment of a bacterial standard for                                        
"purified water" is not necessary.                                                                  
     The agency is defining "sterile water" in this final rule.                                     
Use of this term in the statement of identity of qualifying                                         
bottled waters will allow consumers desiring to purchase water                                      
that is bacteriologically pure to easily identify this type of                                      
water and to distinguish it from purified water that is                                             
chemically pure.                                                                                    
4.  Spring Water                                                                                    
     FDA proposed that bottled water derived from an underground                                    
formation from which water flows naturally to the surface of the                                    
earth, or would flow naturally to the surface of the earth if not                                   
for its collection below the earth's surface, may be called                                         
"spring water."  The agency proposed to provide for the                                             
collection of spring water only at the spring or through a bore                                     
hole adjacent to the point of emergence.  FDA also proposed that                                    
spring water collected with the assistance of a bore hole to                                        
protect the water shall be from the same underground stratum as                                     
the spring and shall retain all the physical properties and be of                                   
the same composition and quality as the water that flows                                            
naturally to the surface of the earth or that would flow                                            
naturally to the surface of the earth if not for its collection                                     
below the earth's surface.  FDA requested comments from                                             
interested persons concerning the definition for "spring water"                                     
and on the use of a bore hole adjacent to the point of emergence                                    
of the spring to facilitate collection of the water.                                                
a.  Consumer surveys                                                                                
     34.  Two comments included consumer telephone surveys, each                                    
conducted by a different bottled water producer, that addressed                                     
issues of consumer understanding and preferences for bottled                                        
water labeled as "spring water."  A number of subsequent comments                                   
pointed to methodological shortcomings in one or the other of the                                   
two consumer surveys, including inadequate sample size,                                             
nonrepresentative sampling, ambiguous and biased question                                           
wording, failure to counterbalance order of questions, improper                                     
survey approach, and flawed interpretations of results.                                             
     The agency recognizes that such problems exist to some                                         
extent in both studies, as they do in virtually all survey                                          
studies, but it is not convinced that there is sufficient basis                                     
for dismissing the results of these studies.  Each study has some merit, and there is a surprising 
degree of agreement between the                                                                     
two studies in their primary findings.  Therefore, FDA finds that                                   
both studies provide useful information concerning consumer                                         
opinions on spring water, and that it is appropriate to use this                                    
information in arriving at a definition for "spring water."                                         
     35.  The principal concern of both surveys, and the primary                                    
subject of comments about the respective survey results, was an                                     
attempt to describe consumer understanding of the use of the term                                   
"spring water" with respect to the method of extraction, bore                                       
hole or surface collection, used to obtain the water.  In study 1                                   
(C302 in this docket), respondents were asked about which                                           
extraction method they would expect would be used to collect a                                      
product called "spring water."  In study 2 (MM5 in this docket),                                    
respondents were asked which extraction method is used to collect                                   
"spring water."                                                                                     
     Many comments criticized one or the other of the studies for                                   
the way the different methods of extraction (borehole or surface                                    
collection) were described to respondents, usually alleging that                                    
the wording introduced a bias in respondents' answers.  In study                                    
1, for example, surface extraction was described as "water that                                     
flows naturally to the surface," and bore hole extraction was                                       
described as "water pumped * * * through a bore hole."  In study                                    
2, surface extraction was described as "water taken from springs                                    
whose water is captured above ground level," and bore hole                                          
extraction was described as "water taken from springs whose water                                   
is captured below ground level."                                                                    
     FDA agrees that biases were introduced by the wording of                                       
these questions.  However, despite the difficulties in                                              
communicating to consumers about methods of extraction for spring                                   
water in a telephone survey, the results of both surveys show                                       
that there is considerable uncertainty among consumers about                                        
which extraction method is or should be used for spring water.                                      
     Study 1 asks the question, "When you see spring water on the                                   
label of a bottle, which of the following describes the water you                                   
would expect to be in the bottle?" in a forced-choice form such                                     
that "not sure" answers are not allowed.  Although 54 percent of                                    
respondents responded that the water naturally flows to the                                         
surface, 46 percent of respondents expressed the possibility that                                   
spring water was extracted from a bore hole.  In addition, even                                     
though the question context strongly encouraged selecting one or                                    
the other of the alternatives provided, 34 percent of respondents                                   
choose to answer "either of the above" when asked which                                             
extraction method they would expect for spring water.  FDA                                          
considers this level of response to the "either of the above"                                       
alternative to indicate considerable consumer uncertainty.                                          
Because of the observed uncertainty, the study documents that                                       
there is no consensus among consumers about how spring water is                                     
or should be extracted.                                                                             
     In study 2, a "not sure" alternative was allowed for each of                                   
the two yes/no questions, "Is bottled spring water taken from                                       
springs whose water is captured above the ground level?" and "Is                                    
bottled spring water taken from springs whose water is captured                                     
below the ground level?"  Forty one percent of respondents                                          
answered "not sure" to both questions, and an additional 13                                         
percent answered "not sure" to one of the two questions.  These                                     
responses mean that, overall, 54 percent of respondents indicated                                   
that they were not sure about the extraction methods used for                                       
bottled spring water.                                                                               
     Given the high levels of consumer uncertainty about                                            
extraction methods used for bottled water that were found in both                                   
studies, FDA concludes that the issue of how spring water is or                                     
should be extracted is not an issue to which many consumers have                                    
given much thought.  At the same time, however, FDA considers the                                   
finding that consumers have limited opinions about the extraction                                   
methods used for bottled spring water to be very relevant to its                                    
objective of developing bottled water definitions that promote                                      
honesty and fair dealing in the marketplace.  The fact that                                         
consumers do not appear to be informed or concerned about issues                                    
related to the extraction methods used for spring water suggests                                    
that FDA has little reason to suggest major changes in the usage                                    
of the "spring water" designation on bottled water on the grounds                                   
of promoting honesty and fair dealing in the marketplace.                                           
Currently, as many comments stated, spring water products on the                                    
market are produced using both methods of extraction.  In                                           
addition, most State and international definitions provide for                                      
both methods of extraction for spring water (Comment 91 and Refs.                                   
2, 7, 11, 12).  Thus, FDA concludes that the use of the term                                        
"spring water" does not imply a particular extraction                                               
method, and that providing for the use of either surface or bore                                    
hole collection of spring water will not mislead consumers.                                         
     36.  A number of comments cited survey results indicating                                      
that consumers perceive that spring water has a higher quality                                      
and a better taste than other kinds of bottled water, and that,                                     
therefore, consumers are more likely to buy it.  They argued                                        
that, because spring water has greater consumer appeal, it is                                       
incumbent on FDA to ensure that the definition of spring water is                                   
not misleading to consumers.                                                                        
     FDA agrees with these comments and with the conclusion,                                        
based mainly on Study 1 findings, that consumers consider bottled                                   
water labeled as spring water to be of a higher quality than                                        
other kinds of bottled water.  FDA notes, however, that the                                         
favorable state of consumer opinion toward spring water has                                         
developed under circumstances in the marketplace in which the                                       
term "spring water" has been used to describe both water                                            
extracted at the surface and water extracted by the bore hole                                       
method.  Given that it has been extracted in both ways, with                                        
apparent consumer satisfaction, how the water is extracted does                                     
not appear to be the key factor.                                                                    
     There is a second aspect of the definition of "spring                                          
water"--from where the water comes.  By the process of                                              
elimination, this factor appears to be key.  Thus, it is this                                       
aspect of the definition that FDA has made most rigorous.                                           
     FDA concludes, therefore, that its requirement in                                              
 165.110(a)(2)(vi) that bottled water labeled as "spring water"                                    
be from the same underground stratum as the spring and always                                       
have the same physical properties, composition, and quality as                                      
water that flows naturally to the surface of the earth, without                                     
specifying a necessary method of extraction, will provide                                           
appropriate protection against use of the term to mislead                                           
consumers about quality characteristics of bottled water.                                           
     37.  A number of comments, based principally on Study 2                                        
findings, argued that safety considerations were the primary                                        
consumer concerns about bottled water, that FDA should take these                                   
concerns into account when deciding on the appropriate definition                                   
of "spring water," and that these concerns provided a sufficient                                    
basis for including water obtained by bore hole extraction in the                                   
definition of "spring water."                                                                       
     FDA agrees that safety considerations are important in the                                     
regulation of bottled water.  However, the agency does not                                          
generally view the standard of identity for a product as the                                        
means to ensure its safety.  FDA stated in the proposed rule (58                                    
FR 393) that it was developing definitions for types of bottled                                     
water to ensure honesty and fair dealing in the interest of                                         
consumers, and this remains the agency's basic purpose for                                          
defining these terms.                                                                               
     FDA has established quality standards for bottled water to                                     
satisfy consumer expectations that bottled water will be of                                         
appropriate quality.  To be of appropriate quality, the water                                       
must be safe.  Thus, the quality standard sets maximum levels                                       
that are well within safe levels for a number of water                                              
contaminants.  FDA has also adopted a good manufacturing practice                                   
(GMP) regulation for bottled water to ensure that bottled                                           
drinking water is processed, bottled, held, and transported under                                   
sanitary conditions that will not render the product injurious to                                   
health.  Thus, regardless of the extraction method used to obtain                                   
bottled water, the water will be safe.                                                              
     For these reasons, FDA does not see consumers' concerns                                        
about safety as a particular reason for including water that is                                     
obtained by bore hole extraction in the definition of "spring                                       
water."  FDA is including water obtained in this way in the                                         
definition because, as explained above, bore hole collection of                                     
spring water is a common industry practice, and consumers are not                                   
misled by the use of this collection method.  The key to the                                        
definition, as FDA stated in response to comment 36 of this                                         
document is from where the water comes.                                                             
b.  Use of a bore hole                                                                              
     38.  A number of comments objected to a definition of                                          
"spring water" that would allow the use of a bore hole to collect                                   
the water.  Comments stated that the definition would allow "well                                   
water" or "bore hole water" to be labeled as "spring water."                                        
Comments requested that the reference to bore hole extraction be                                    
deleted from the proposed regulation because the water is not                                       
"spring water."                                                                                     
     Some comments stated that ground water derived by the use of                                   
bore holes is not compatible with the geological definition of a                                    
spring and should not be permitted to be labeled as "spring                                         
water."  One of the comments added that the proposed definition                                     
is inaccurate and does not represent the common usage of this                                       
term by professional hydrogeologists, professional ground water                                     
hydrologists, or the general public.  It stated that springs are                                    
naturally occurring discharges or flows of ground water that                                        
occur at the land surface.                                                                          
     On the other hand, a number of comments argued that water                                      
extracted through the use of a bore hole should be eligible to be                                   
called "spring water."  Comments stated that a bore hole is a                                       
preferred method of spring water collection, and that inclusion                                     
of this method of collection in the definition of "spring water"                                    
would provide flexibility to manufacturers.  One comment from a                                     
hydrogeologist stated that the use of bore hole collection                                          
methods is widely recognized throughout the United States and the                                   
rest of the world as a safe, convenient, sanitary, and reliable                                     
method for intercepting spring water before it emerges to the                                       
earth's surface, where it can be exposed to sources of pollution                                    
or alteration.                                                                                      
     A number of comments noted that the use of bore holes has                                      
long been recognized in this country, Canada, Europe, and                                           
elsewhere as a preferred and sometimes necessary method for                                         
extracting spring water.  Comments stated that bore hole                                            
collection of spring water is practiced exclusively in Europe and                                   
many other parts of the world for sanitary reasons.  Comments                                       
added that the proposed definition recognizes that over 50                                          
percent of the water used in domestic spring water production is                                    
currently collected through the use of a bore hole, and that the                                    
definition provides a consistent standard of identity regardless                                    
of the technology used for extraction and collection.                                               
     One comment stated that some advance the view that spring                                      
water collected at the surface is natural because its collection                                    
involves no physical or technological intervention into, or                                         
development of, the spring source or of the water, and that                                         
subsurface collection of spring water is not natural because it                                     
involves extraction and piping through a bore hole, which means                                     
that the finished product is produced through physical alteration                                   
of, and intervention into, the source.  The comment said that                                       
this view is misleading because even when spring water is                                           
collected at the surface, piping must be used, a bore must be                                       
drilled, and technology must be employed in the collection                                          
process.  The comment said that frequently, physical alteration                                     
of the natural orifice also must be undertaken.                                                     
     The agency has decided to adopt the proposed definition of                                     
"spring water" as water that is derived from an underground                                         
formation from which water flows naturally to the surface of the                                    
earth.  FDA has also decided to provide that "spring water" may                                     
be collected below the earth's surface through a bore hole.  As                                     
previously discussed in response to comment 35 in this final                                        
rule, consumers do not necessarily believe that spring water is                                     
collected at the surface of the earth.  In addition, over half of                                   
the spring water sold in the United States is extracted through a                                   
bore hole.  Therefore, the agency has concluded that providing                                      
for the use of a bore hole in addition to surface collection will                                   
permit production flexibility without interfering with                                              
established consumer understanding or expectations in any way.                                      
     FDA recognizes that some geologists and hydrogeologists                                        
disagree with the use of a bore hole in the collection of spring                                    
water.  However, FDA finds that as long as the physical                                             
properties, composition, and quality of the water that is                                           
captured by a bore hole are the same as those of the water from                                     
the same underground formation that flows to the surface, it is                                     
appropriate to label the water as spring water.  If the use of a                                    
bore hole does not change the characteristics of that water, then                                   
the bore hole is only tapping the underground water source that                                     
feeds the spring.  However, if the water collected through the                                      
bore hole has different characteristics from the water emerging                                     
from the spring orifice, the water is not spring water.  To                                         
clarify that the source of the water must be the same underground                                   
formation, the agency is adding a provision to                                                      
 165.110(a)(2)(vi) that the bore hole collection of spring water                                   
must be through a bore hole tapping the underground formation                                       
feeding the spring.                                                                                 
     A spring is a natural flow of water from the earth (Ref.                                       
13).  An aquifer is a porous rock stratum that yields water in a                                    
usable quantity to a well or spring (Ref. 5).  A stratum is a                                       
single layer of rock.  Spring water is water that emerges from                                      
the spring orifice or water from the stratum that feeds the                                         
spring.  Scientific field methods can demonstrate that water that                                   
emerges from a spring and water from an adjacent bore hole are                                      
from the same underground source.  Geochemical methods may be                                       
used to demonstrate that water extracted from a spring and water                                    
extracted from an adjacent bore hole are of the same chemical                                       
quality.                                                                                            
     FDA agrees that there must be appropriate development of an                                    
approved source, whether the water is to be collected at the                                        
natural orifice or with the use of a bore hole.  Both methods of                                    
collection require careful engineering for proper water                                             
collection.  A source must be appropriately developed, in                                           
accordance with the GMP's in part 129, to qualify as an approved                                    
source.  Under  129.3(a), an approved source is one that has                                       
been inspected by the State and local government agencies having                                    
jurisdiction.  Under  129.35(a)(1), the source must be properly                                    
located, protected, and operated and be easily accessible and                                       
adequate.                                                                                           
     In summary, FDA finds that water that is collected by use of                                   
a bore hole tapping the underground stratum of a spring is                                          
appropriately included in the definition of "spring water" in                                       
 165.110(a)(2)(vi), as long as the source of the water is the                                      
same no matter which method of collection is used, and the method                                   
of collection does not interfere with the quality or composition                                    
of the water.                                                                                       
     39.  Comments contended that this rulemaking is being                                          
orchestrated by parties who will profit from being able to                                          
legally increase their production of spring water by using                                          
pumping mechanisms.  One comment stated that the reason that                                        
anyone would bore a well next to a spring is because the flow of                                    
water from the spring has decreased.  Another comment added that                                    
the bottled water industry wants a loophole that would allow                                        
companies to call their well water by the better perceived term                                     
"spring water."                                                                                     
     One comment stated that to allow "spring water" to be                                          
collected through a bore hole that is adjacent to the point of                                      
emergence is being less than honest with consumers.  This comment                                   
maintained that allowing this practice only serves the interest                                     
of a special segment of the bottled water industry.  The comment                                    
stated that when bore holes have to be qualified to determine                                       
whether they are adjacent to the spring and to determine whether                                    
the water is from the same underground stratum, and has all the                                     
same physical properties, composition, and quality, as the water                                    
emerging at the surface, then fair dealing will be lost in the                                      
many ways that these provisions will be interpreted.                                                
     Conversely, a comment that supported the use of a bore hole                                    
stated that adoption of the standard as proposed would protect                                      
consumers against artificial barriers to commerce and restraints                                    
on competition that ultimately raise consumer prices and reduce                                     
product quality.  Another comment stated that the controversy                                       
about the use of a bore hole stems partly from a lack of                                            
understanding of practices accepted around the world and partly                                     
by small companies striving to use regulations for competitive                                      
advantages.                                                                                         
     One comment asserted that differentiating between the same                                     
water, whether it comes from a natural orifice or from a bore                                       
hole tapping an aquifer, is an artificial marketing difference.                                     
     Some comments stated that if the definition of "spring                                         
water" were to preclude the use of bore holes, many smaller                                         
companies would be constrained from expanding their businesses.                                     
These comments added that as long as the water is compositionally                                   
identical, the method of extraction is a production matter and                                      
should not be a factor in classifying the water.                                                    
     The agency disagrees with the comment that stated that                                         
consumer interests would be compromised by providing for the use                                    
of a bore hole in the definition of spring water.  As discussed                                     
in the response to comment 35 in this document, many consumers                                      
have not formed opinions concerning an appropriate method of                                        
extraction of spring water, and, based on information from the                                      
consumer surveys and other comments received, FDA has concluded                                     
that consumers are not misled because of the use of a bore hole.                                    
     FDA also disagrees that its position only serves the                                           
interest of a special segment of the bottled water industry.                                        
Currently, as stated by many comments, over half of the spring                                      
water produced in the United States is collected through bore                                       
holes.  Not providing for the use of a bore hole in the                                             
definition of spring water would thus force a significant segment                                   
of the industry to relabel their products as other types of                                         
bottled water products.  Given that most consumers are not                                          
concerned about whether a bore hole or a spring collection box is                                   
used, and that FDA can control the source of the water and its                                      
composition and quality by means of its standard, the agency                                        
advises that it is not aware of any factor that compels such a                                      
result.                                                                                             
     In addition, the agency disagrees that its definition will                                     
provide a loophole to allow water that is not spring water to be                                    
called "spring water," with certain parties profiting from a                                        
broadened definition.  FDA's definition is no broader than the                                      
definition used by most States, most notably the major bottled                                      
water-producing States of New York, California, Texas, and                                          
Florida.  These States already provide for the use of a bore                                        
hole, although the State of North Carolina has a stricter                                           
definition for "spring water."  Many foreign governments have                                       
even broader definitions for "spring water" than is provided by                                     
FDA's definition.  For example, the government of the province of                                   
Quebec defines "spring water" as ground water containing greater                                    
than 10 ppm TDS and less than 500 ppm TDS, regardless of whether                                    
the water flowed to the surface of the earth or was collected                                       
through a well.  Therefore, FDA concludes that its definition                                       
will not create a loophole to market water that is not spring                                       
water.  FDA's definition is generally consistent with worldwide                                     
industry practice and most government regulations.  Thus, if                                        
anything, FDA's definition will help to eliminate artificial                                        
barriers to competition and commerce.                                                               
     Although how the determination of whether a bore hole                                          
actually is tapping a spring is made may vary because of regional                                   
geological differences (e.g., limestone formations versus granite                                   
formations), the water collected from a bore hole must be the                                       
same water that feeds the spring's natural orifice.  To be called                                   
"spring water," the water must be from a stream that flows                                          
naturally to the surface of the earth.  No matter what method of                                    
extraction is used, the water must have the same physical                                           
properties, quality, and composition as the water that actually                                     
flows to the surface.                                                                               
     The agency recognizes that there is the possibility of a                                       
bore hole extracting water from an aquifer that does not feed the                                   
spring.  However, the agency is requiring in  165.110(a)(2)(vi)                                    
that the water be from the same underground stratum, retain all                                     
the physical properties, and be of the same composition and                                         
quality as the water that flows naturally to the surface of the                                     
earth.  Water from a different underground stratum will have                                        
different properties and characteristics.  Thus, the water will                                     
not meet the definition of spring water unless it has the same                                      
properties and characteristics as the water that flows through                                      
the spring's natural orifice.  Therefore,  165.110(a)(2)(vi)                                       
will protect against the possibility of a bore hole extracting                                      
water that does not feed the spring.                                                                
     40.  Comments noted that a domestically produced beer that                                     
is identical to a German beer could not be called German beer                                       
because it does not come from Germany.  They stated that,                                           
similarly, spring water must come from a spring, not a bore hole.                                   
     Another comment maintained that under the law, "the public                                     
is entitled to get what it chooses, though the choice may be                                        
dictated by caprice or by fashion or perhaps by ignorance"                                          
(F.T.C. v. Algoma Lumber Co., 291 U.S. 67, 79 (1934)).  It                                          
concluded that bottlers should not be allowed to tell consumers                                     
that a product is spring water when it actually comes from a bore                                   
hole.                                                                                               
     The agency disagrees with the comments.  In the example of                                     
the German beer, FDA recognizes that a German source does indeed                                    
make the product a German beer, and that if the beer was not                                        
produced in Germany the product would not be German beer.                                           
However, in the case of spring water, the underground source of                                     
the water, that is, the spring, will be the same whether                                            
collected at the surface or through use of a bore hole.  It is                                      
only the method of extraction that is different.  Therefore,                                        
water that is from an underground formation from which water                                        
flows to the surface, and that has the same physical properties,                                    
quality, and composition as the water that flows to the surface,                                    
is fairly and appropriately considered to be spring water even if                                   
it is extracted by use of a bore hole.                                                              
     41.  Several comments stated that natural spring water is                                      
free flowing, and that if a bore hole is used by a bottler, it                                      
should be so noted on the label to allow consumers to make the                                      
ultimate decision in this issue.                                                                    
     Other comments suggested that to differentiate between                                         
spring water that is naturally flowing and spring water that is                                     
collected from a bore hole, FDA should define "natural spring                                       
water" as water that is derived from an underground formation                                       
from which water flows naturally to the surface of the earth and                                    
"spring water" as water derived from an underground source from                                     
which water flows naturally or through a bore hole adjacent to                                      
the point of emergence.  One comment added that to not                                              
differentiate between "natural spring" and "spring" waters would                                    
be to perpetuate a fraud.                                                                           
     The agency disagrees with the comments.  As defined in                                         
 165.110(a)(2)(vi), the underground source of "spring water"                                       
must be the same whether it is extracted from the natural orifice                                   
or from a bore hole.  In addition, as shown by the submitted                                        
surveys, many consumers did not object to the use of a bore hole                                    
to extract spring water.  Therefore, it is not necessary to                                         
establish mandatory labeling regulations to distinguish between                                     
spring water extracted through a bore hole or through the natural                                   
orifice.  However, FDA would not object to a truthful,                                              
nonmisleading statement on the label that stated that the water                                     
flowed naturally to the surface, if indeed the water was                                            
extracted from the natural orifice without the use of external                                      
force, or to a statement that the water was extracted through a                                     
bore hole.                                                                                          
     42.  One comment suggested that bore hole-collected water                                      
more clearly fits the definition of "artesian well water."  It                                      
stated that FDA defined the other types of water with their                                         
proper historic geologic definitions, and that spring water                                         
should also be defined in this manner.                                                              
     The agency disagrees that spring water collected from a bore                                   
hole more clearly meets the definition of "artesian water."  The                                    
definition for "spring water" mandates that the water come from                                     
an underground source where water flows naturally to the earth's                                    
surface before the drilling of a bore hole.  Artesian water comes                                   
from a well tapping a confined aquifer.  Artesian water does not                                    
flow to the earth's surface unless a well is drilled to tap the                                     
source, and the natural hydraulic pressure is great enough to                                       
force the water to the earth's surface.  Therefore, spring water                                    
and artesian water are from distinct sources.  However, to                                          
clearly distinguish between the definitions of "artesian water"                                     
and "spring water," FDA is modifying  165.110(a)(2)(vi) to state                                   
that there must be a natural force causing the water to flow to                                     
the surface through a natural orifice for the water to be labeled                                   
as "spring water."                                                                                  
c.  Adjacency                                                                                       
     43.  Some comments asked how one could be assured that water                                   
collected through a bore hole would have emerged from the ground                                    
through a free-flowing spring at a point adjacent to the bore                                       
hole had it not been extracted through the bore hole.                                               
     Several comments suggested that FDA incorporate a                                              
requirement for hydrogeological data to demonstrate a hydraulic                                     
link between a bore hole and a spring to document that the source                                   
is a spring.  One comment added that the spring water definition                                    
will not resolve the matter of whether a bore hole is adjacent to                                   
a spring unless scientific support for the term "adjacent" is                                       
presented.                                                                                          
     Some comments suggested specific methods to determine the                                      
hydraulic linkage.  These included using dye tracer tests,                                          
geophysical conductivity tests, water analyses, and graphical                                       
methods, such as the Stiff diagram and the Piper trilinear                                          
diagram, to demonstrate that the chemical and physical                                              
characteristics of the water correspond to those of the spring.                                     
Comments stated that pumping should cause a measurable decline in                                   
the spring's discharge rate if the well is tapping spring water,                                    
although if the withdrawal rate from the bore hole is small                                         
relative to the discharge rate of the spring, or if the spring is                                   
submerged, this decline may not be measurable.                                                      
     The comments stated that because of the differences in the                                     
mineral composition of geological strata, no one set of analyses                                    
will apply to all spring formations to demonstrate compliance                                       
with these criteria.                                                                                
     Some comments suggested that the criterion of adjacency used                                   
in the hydrogeological context of hydraulic connection is                                           
reasonable and logical and objectively addresses this important                                     
and controversial issue.  They requested that language be added                                     
to the regulation to require that bore hole adjacency to the                                        
spring be verified by its measurable hydraulic influence on the                                     
spring flow from the natural orifice at the time of collection,                                     
as certified by a professional hydrogeologist.                                                      
     However, some comments asserted that it will be difficult to                                   
establish the uniformity or sameness of actual spring water and                                     
water collected through an adjacent bore hole.                                                      
     The agency agrees that hydraulic linkage is important in the                                   
definition of "spring water."  If the bore hole taps the same                                       
underground water source as that which feeds the natural spring,                                    
and has the same physical properties, composition, and quality as                                   
the water emerging from the natural orifice, it is clear that the                                   
location of the bore hole relative to that of the point of                                          
emergence is not relevant.  However, a bore hole adjacent to a                                      
natural emergence can actually tap another water bed far below                                      
the aquifer feeding the natural spring source and thus collect                                      
water of a totally different composition from that of the water                                     
which emerges from the natural spring.                                                              
     The agency concludes that requiring a hydraulic (i.e.,                                         
physical) connection between a bore hole and a spring will                                          
clarify the definition of spring water and will eliminate the                                       
possibility of indiscriminate bore hole use.  Therefore, FDA is                                     
modifying its definition of "spring water" in  165.110(a)(2)(vi)                                   
to require that a measurable hydraulic connection, using a                                          
hydrogeologically valid method, between the bore hole and the                                       
natural spring be established to show that the water is from the                                    
same underground stratum as the spring.                                                             
     The comments suggested several different methods to                                            
determine hydraulic linkage.  One or more hydrogeologically valid                                   
methods may be used as appropriate to determine hydraulic                                           
linkage.  However, not all methods may be appropriate for                                           
different geologic regions or for the specific bore hole site.                                      
Therefore, the agency is not recommending or requiring any                                          
specific method or methods.                                                                         
     44.  Some comments stated that the location of the bore hole                                   
relative to that of the point of emergence is not relevant as                                       
long as the bore hole taps the same underground water source as                                     
that that feeds, or that would feed, the natural spring if not                                      
for the collection below the earth's surface.  Other comments                                       
objected to the use of the word "adjacent" in the definition                                        
because they believe that it is ambiguous.  Comments suggested                                      
that the agency modify the definition for "spring water" to                                         
delete the use of the term "adjacent."  One comment added that                                      
such a definition would be easier to enforce and would eliminate                                    
the need to arbitrarily decide what "adjacent" means in terms of                                    
a measurable distance.                                                                              
     Conversely, one comment stated that if bore hole access is                                     
permitted in the final definition of "spring water," then it is                                     
crucial to retain the requirement that the bore hole be adjacent                                    
or near to the point of natural emergence of the spring.  The                                       
comment stated that this requirement is necessary to assure that                                    
the bore hole is tapping only water that would otherwise emerge                                     
at that point, and that consumers are not misled that they are                                      
purchasing spring water from a specifically identified spring                                       
source.                                                                                             
     The agency agrees with the comments that suggested that the                                    
term "adjacent" be deleted from the definition of spring water.                                     
As discussed in the previous comment, the agency is requiring                                       
that there be a measurable hydraulic connection, using a                                            
hydrogeologically valid method, between the bore hole and the                                       
natural spring established to show that the water is from the                                       
same underground stratum as the spring.  To meet the definition                                     
of "spring water," the manufacturer must ensure that the water                                      
collected through a bore hole is from the same underground                                          
stratum as the spring and has the same physical properties,                                         
composition, and quality as the water that flows naturally to the                                   
surface of the earth from the spring.  Water collected at a                                         
distance from the natural orifice will not have traveled the same                                   
path as the water that flows from the natural orifice of the                                        
spring and, therefore, could have a different composition.  FDA                                     
is accommodating the use of bore hole technology so long as there                                   
is assurance that the water from the bore hole has the same                                         
composition and characteristics as the water from the natural                                       
orifice.  If the bore hole is too far from the natural orifice,                                     
the latter assurance would not exist.                                                               
     FDA concludes that the requirement of a measurable hydraulic                                   
connection between the bore hole and the spring's natural orifice                                   
adequately encompasses the intent of the proposed adjacency                                         
requirement.  Therefore, the agency is deleting the requirement                                     
in  165.110(a)(2)(vi) that the bore hole be adjacent to the                                        
point of emergence of a spring.                                                                     
     45.  A number of comments asked FDA to explain or define the                                   
terms "adjacent" and "point of emergence."  Comments requested                                      
that FDA designate a specific distance (e.g., 50 feet, 100 feet,                                    
250 feet, 1 mile) for how far bore holes could be located from                                      
the source and still meet the criterion of "adjacent to the point                                   
of emergence."  One comment suggested that a person should be                                       
able to see the spring and bore hole at the same time.  Some                                        
comments held that the rule should specify that the bore hole                                       
must be as close as possible to a specifically identified spring                                    
discharge, and that the bore hole must be closer to the spring                                      
discharge than to any other source of ground or surface water.                                      
     One comment stated that the State of California informally                                     
defines "adjacent" as a distance of approximately 250 feet.  It                                     
stated that this definition avoids cases of confusion, such as                                      
the installation of spring bore holes several miles from the                                        
spring location.  Other comments stated that some States have                                       
used a ballpark figure of 200 feet for adjacent, others more or                                     
less than 200 feet.                                                                                 
     Another comment stated that the reasoning provided in the                                      
preamble of the proposal necessitates a relatively narrow                                           
interpretation of "adjacent" as a point located a minimal                                           
distance from the spring orifice and asked that a statement to                                      
this effect be included in the regulation.                                                          
     In the preamble of the January 1993 proposal (58 FR 393 at                                     
399), FDA stated that allowing for a bore hole adjacent to a                                        
spring would provide for the tapping of the source at a point                                       
near the mouth of the spring.  The agency is not specifying a                                       
particular distance between a bore hole and the mouth of the                                        
spring because the appropriate distance will vary significantly                                     
in different geological areas.  FDA is also not adopting a                                          
requirement that a person be able to see the spring and bore hole                                   
at the same time because, depending on the terrain, a person may                                    
be able to see a great distance or only a small distance.                                           
Therefore, FDA finds that defining "adjacent" in these terms                                        
would not be appropriate.  As discussed in the previous comment,                                    
the agency is defining adjacency in terms of a measurable                                           
hydraulic connection.                                                                               
     FDA agrees that the collection apparatus should be as close                                    
as possible to the specifically identified spring discharge.  The                                   
agency also agrees that the bore hole should normally be closer                                     
to the spring discharge than to any other source of ground or                                       
surface water.  However, the agency does not agree that this                                        
distance need be specified in the regulation because it is                                          
requiring that a measurable hydraulic connection, using a                                           
hydrogeologically valid method, between the bore hole and the                                       
natural spring be established to show that the water is from the                                    
same underground stratum as the spring ( 165.110(a)(2)(vi)).                                       
The agency concludes that the requirement for a hydraulic                                           
connection is appropriate and avoids uncertainty concerning any                                     
specific distance implied by the term "adjacent."                                                   
     46.  Comments requested that FDA address the issues of                                         
ownership and control in the regulations.  Comments questioned                                      
whether proper inspections could be mandated in a case where a                                      
spring is located on one owner's property, and the bore hole is                                     
on another's property.  One comment stated that the ownership and                                   
control of the bore hole should be the same as that of the spring                                   
for quality control purposes.  One comment stated that, if a                                        
company owns, or owns the rights to, a legitimate spring, it                                        
should not matter how it collects the water as long as it does so                                   
in a sanitary way.                                                                                  
     The issues raised by these comments are outside the scope of                                   
this rulemaking and really beyond the coverage of the act.                                          
Issues of ownership and control turn on property laws, water                                        
rights, and access to the spring's natural orifice.  However, FDA                                   
cautions that a manufacturer must be able to test the water that                                    
flows naturally to the surface of the earth to ensure that the                                      
water that it is collecting from the bore hole is the same water                                    
as that from the spring that flows to the surface, and that there                                   
is a hydraulic connection between the bore hole and the natural                                     
spring.  If the manufacturer cannot establish that the water that                                   
it is calling "spring water" is the same as that from the                                           
identified spring, it runs a significant risk that its product is                                   
misbranded, and, thus, that it will be the subject of a                                             
regulatory action.                                                                                  
d.  External force                                                                                  
     47.  Several comments objected to the use of external force                                    
in the collection of spring water.  One of the comments stated                                      
that consumers believe that spring water has no unique taste,                                       
color, or other characteristic other than being water that comes                                    
to the surface through a natural orifice, and that most believe                                     
that the water flowed to the surface by the spring's natural                                        
pressure.  Comments stated that to furnish other than a natural                                     
flow rate by supplemental pressure is misleading, and that such a                                   
product should be labeled as "well water."                                                          
     Comments stated that the use of a bore hole is appropriate                                     
only if external force is not used.  One comment stated that the                                    
freely flowing water from a natural spring site represents the                                      
overflow of the underlying aquifer, and that, by contrast, pumped                                   
water from a vertical well of arbitrary depth may tap many                                          
hydrogeologic layers, drawing against the storage of the aquifer.                                   
The comment asserted that some trace of the natural flow should                                     
be visible at the original spring orifice.                                                          
     One comment stated that some of the problems associated with                                   
pumped wells are:  (1)  The cone of depression caused by pumping                                    
an unconfined aquifer triggers a series of changes in the ground                                    
water and aquifer;  (2)  dewatering the aquifer around a well                                       
allows air intrusion into the formation voids, which can oxidize                                    
iron and other metals resulting in reduced water storage                                            
capacity, thereby increasing the size of the cone of depression;                                    
(3)  pumping from an aquifer that yields water to a spring can                                      
induce recharge from neighboring hydrogeologic units that are not                                   
normally hydraulically connected to the spring; and (4)  pumping                                    
an aquifer causes changes in flow velocity and direction of flow                                    
and creates turbulence.                                                                             
     The agency does not agree that the use of external force                                       
should be prohibited for the extraction of spring water.                                            
Although there must be a natural force that causes at least some                                    
of the water to flow to the surface through a natural orifice,                                      
this force may not be sufficient to cause the water to flow                                         
through some bore holes.  The angle and the distance of the bore                                    
hole from the mouth of the spring may not provide adequate water                                    
pressure for the water to flow through the bore hole.                                               
     It is true, as described by the comment, that changes may                                      
occur in the underground strata as a result of pumping.  The                                        
creation of a cone of depression, changes in water flow, and the                                    
nature of the recharge can alter the composition of the ground                                      
water.  However, if the properties of the water change as a                                         
result of the use of external force, the water is no longer                                         
spring water because the water is no longer the same water that                                     
flows through the natural spring orifice.  If pumping action                                        
alters the properties of the water, pumping will have to cease,                                     
and the area allowed to return to its natural equilibrium, so                                       
that water collected from the bore hole with the aid of external                                    
force will once again have the same properties as the water                                         
flowing from the natural spring orifice.  If not, while pumping                                     
may continue, the water can no longer be labeled as "spring                                         
water."                                                                                             
     Finally, the agency points out, in response to one comment,                                    
that if water is pumped from a vertical bore hole of any depth                                      
that taps other hydrologic strata, that water is not spring                                         
water.                                                                                              
     FDA concludes that the use of external force in the                                            
collection of spring water is not misleading to consumers because                                   
the agency is requiring in  165.110(a)(2)(vi) that the water be                                    
derived from an underground formation from which water flows                                        
naturally to the surface of the earth; that the water have the                                      
same physical properties, composition, and quality as the water                                     
that emerges from the natural orifice; and that there be a                                          
hydraulic connection between the bore hole and the spring                                           
stratum.  Thus, the agency concludes that the definition will                                       
ensure that water labeled as "spring water" meets consumers'                                        
expectations.                                                                                       
     48.  Three comments stated that FDA should require that the                                    
spring continue to flow to the surface naturally.  They stated                                      
that if the spring ceases to flow for a period of 90 days, then                                     
the water from the bore hole should no longer be considered to be                                   
spring water, and any labeling of the product as such must cease.                                   
One of the comments stated that such a requirement would help to                                    
ensure the integrity of the spring source and prevent                                               
contamination caused by a reversed flow close to the ground                                         
surface.                                                                                            
     One comment stated that if the spring ceases to flow to the                                    
earth's surface, the pumping mechanism is at fault, and                                             
comparative samples would not be available.  Another comment                                        
asked whether, if the spring ceases to flow as a result of                                          
pumping, the water may still be called "spring water."                                              
     The agency agrees with the concerns of the comments.  In                                       
some cases pumping may cause the spring to cease flowing through                                    
the natural orifice, and, thus, comparative samples of the water                                    
would not be available because of the use of external force when                                    
the water is collected through a bore hole.  It is important to                                     
maintain some flow of water through the natural orifice to                                          
prevent any reverse flow of surface water, which could then be                                      
pumped through the bore hole.  As previously stated in the                                          
response to comment 12 of this document, ground water under the                                     
influence of surface water cannot be called "spring water."                                         
     FDA recognizes that occasionally a spring may cease flowing                                    
temporarily because of fluctuations in ground water levels.                                         
Ground water fluctuations may be caused by natural conditions                                       
(e.g., drought) or man-induced (e.g., pumping) and are classified                                   
as short-lived, diurnal, seasonal, and long-term changes                                            
(Ref. 9).  If the spring has ceased flowing, and this cessation                                     
is not a temporary condition, the water is not spring water.  In                                    
addition, if the external force is routinely (e.g., more often                                      
than during the time of year when the water table is typically                                      
low) causing cessation of the spring's flow to the surface, this                                    
too is not a temporary condition, and the water does not qualify                                    
to be called "spring water."                                                                        
     The State of Florida's definition for "spring water" does                                      
not include water from a strata feeding a spring that ceases to                                     
flow naturally to the surface for a period of 90 days (Comment                                      
184).  The agency agrees that there must be an expectation that                                     
the spring will continue to naturally flow to the surface for the                                   
water to qualify as spring water.  Thus, any cessation in the                                       
flow of the spring from the natural orifice must be for a limited                                   
period of time.  Ninety days is an appropriate time limit for                                       
seasonal types of changes in ground water.  However, the agency                                     
will consider each situation on a case-by-case basis and take                                       
into consideration all circumstances (e.g., climatic conditions                                     
and effect of pumping) causing the flow cessation.                                                  
     To clarify in  165.110(a)(2)(vi) that the spring must                                         
continue to flow when external force is applied to a bore hole in                                   
the collection of spring water, FDA is deleting the statement                                       
that it included in the proposed regulation that the water would                                    
flow naturally to the surface of the earth if not for its                                           
collection below the earth's surface.  In addition, the agency is                                   
adding a requirement in  165.110(a)(2)(vi) that if spring water                                    
is collected with the use of external force, water must continue                                    
to naturally flow to the surface of the earth through the                                           
spring's natural orifice.                                                                           
     49.  A number of comments expressed concern that the use of                                    
external force will allow a spring water bottler to extract more                                    
water from the ground than would have naturally flowed to the                                       
surface of the earth through the spring's natural orifice.                                          
Comments requested that the agency include a provision in the definition of "spring water" to requi
re that the quantity of                                                                             
water extracted through external force not exceed the quantity of                                   
the water that would flow naturally to the surface of the earth                                     
if not for its collection below the earth's surface.                                                
     Two comments asked what the purpose of permitting the use of                                   
a bore hole was if the quality of the water from the bore hole                                      
must equal that of the water that flows naturally to the earth's                                    
surface except to enable the pumping of larger volumes of water                                     
from a stratum.  Another comment held that under the proposed                                       
rule, there will be few springs developed with collection boxes                                     
because bore holes will be generally more economically                                              
advantageous, and greater volumes of water will normally be                                         
available through the use of bore holes than through the use of                                     
collection boxes.                                                                                   
     One comment added that provision for the use of bore holes                                     
could encourage bottlers to exceed the safe yield from the                                          
spring's aquifer.  It stated that excessive withdrawal is usually                                   
discussed in terms of "mining" of the water (defined as when more                                   
water is withdrawn than is replaced by recharge).  The comment                                      
stated that the real issue as far as surface contamination is                                       
concerned is not the "mining" of water or the collection device                                     
but the quality and purity of the aquifer as determined by the                                      
source of recharge.                                                                                 
     One comment expressed concern that the proposed rule is                                        
silent on any method to identify when, because of overpumping,                                      
wells are capturing water that would otherwise not flow to the                                      
spring.  It stated that overpumped bore holes (i.e., those that                                     
pump more water than the spring naturally discharges) could                                         
induce flow from surface water or nearby contaminant sources,                                       
such as septic tanks.  The comment stated that possible solutions                                   
to this problem would be to:  (1)  Restrict the allowable daily                                     
pumping volume to that volume equal to the natural average (mean)                                   
daily flow from the spring; (2)  restrict the use of bore holes                                     
to those that do not require the "assistance of external force"                                     
(i.e., pumping); or (3)  require a demonstration that any                                           
additional pumping is not altering the flow paths to the spring                                     
such that flow is induced from nearby potential sources of                                          
contamination to the well.                                                                          
     FDA agrees that there may be adverse effects of overpumping                                    
(i.e., mining) a bore hole that is tapping a spring.  There may                                     
be public health concerns if the recharge to the aquifer is                                         
contaminated by surface water.  In addition, ground water                                           
extracted with external force, and under the direct influence of                                    
surface water because of overpumping, is not spring water because                                   
the source of the water is not entirely the source that feeds the                                   
spring.  However, such water may be treated and called "bottled                                     
water" or another applicable name.                                                                  
     FDA does not object to the use of external force, and does                                     
not deem it necessary to restrict the amount of water that may be                                   
extracted through the use of external force, as long as the water                                   
meets the requirements of  165.110(a)(2)(vi) (e.g., it is                                          
compositionally the same as the water flowing from the natural                                      
orifice).  Water that has not traveled the same course as the                                       
water feeding the spring, and, thus, that does not have the same                                    
characteristics as water from the spring, cannot be labeled as                                      
"spring water."                                                                                     
     The agency disagrees that allowing the use of a bore hole                                      
and external force will decrease the number of springs developed                                    
with collection boxes.  Many States already allow the use of both                                   
extraction methods, and both methods are already used by                                            
manufacturers.  Providing for the use of both methods of                                            
collection of spring water allows manufacturers the flexibility                                     
to use the method best suited for their spring site.                                                
     A demonstration that pumping is altering the flow paths to                                     
the spring, such that flow is induced from nearby potential                                         
sources of contamination to the bore hole, could include bore                                       
hole pump tests, monitoring of observation wells, and ground                                        
water flow modeling.  EPA's Ground Water Protection Division has                                    
developed a variety of tools designed to assist State and local                                     
governments in the task of identifying the capture zones of                                         
pumping as part of the Wellhead Protection Program (WHPA).  A                                       
capture zone is the area around a bore hole containing ground                                       
water that is destined to flow to that bore hole within a                                           
specified time.  EPA's existing ground water flow model (WHPA                                       
2.1) can identify induced flow from surface water caused by                                         
changes in pumping rates.  Should a demonstration of the effects                                    
of pumping be required, this model could be used as a tool by                                       
government agencies to determine the impact of the aquifer's                                        
recharge.  FDA concludes that a ground water flow model could be                                    
used to ascertain whether allowable overpumping is inducing                                         
deleterious results.  However, regardless of the use of external                                    
force to extract spring water, the water must still comply with                                     
the definition in  165.110(a)(2)(vi) to be labeled as "spring                                      
water."                                                                                             
e.  Source approval and enforcement issues                                                          
     50.  Comments asked how it can be proven that the water from                                   
the bore hole is from the same stratum as the water that is                                         
actually emerging from the spring.  They stated that once the                                       
bore hole at the spring has been constructed and the                                                
establishment is in operation, it would be difficult to verify                                      
that the water from the bore hole met the definition of spring                                      
water.  One comment asked what type of documentation the producer                                   
could keep that would satisfy the requirements of the regulation                                    
concerning source.  It asked whether the records or a                                               
certification statement from the drilling company that drilled                                      
the holes would be necessary, or whether a site examination and                                     
the manufacturer's word on source would be adequate.                                                
     One comment expressed concern about potential abuse from the                                   
use of a bore hole because the nonexistence of a spring can be                                      
readily attributed to the effect of the bore hole, and no                                           
confirmation of the prior existence of a spring at that location                                    
is required.                                                                                        
     The agency acknowledges the concerns of the comments.                                          
Section 129.35(a)(1) states that the product water supply for                                       
each plant shall be:  (1)  From an approved source that is                                          
properly located, protected, and operated; (2)  easily                                              
accessible, adequate, and of a safe, sanitary quality; and (3)                                      
in conformance at all times with the applicable laws and                                            
regulations of the government agency or agencies having                                             
jurisdiction.  However, part 129 does not require that the                                          
government agency having jurisdiction identify or certify that                                      
the source is a spring source.                                                                      
     As discussed in the response to comment 48, FDA has modified                                   
 165.110(a)(2)(vi) to mandate that the spring continue to flow,                                    
although it may be at a diminished rate, for the product to                                         
qualify as "spring water."  In addition, it is important that                                       
manufacturers identify the location of the spring to determine                                      
that the water is, in fact, flowing and, thus is spring water.  A                                   
spring is a flow of water from the earth.  If there is no                                           
identifiable spring, the water can not be labeled as "spring                                        
water."  Thus, it is critical that manufacturers of "spring                                         
water" identify the exact location of the natural orifice where                                     
the spring flows from the earth.  Therefore, the agency is                                          
modifying  165.110(a)(2)(vi) to include a requirement that the                                     
location of the spring be identified.                                                               
     There must be other means of verifying labeling claims once                                    
the bore hole at the spring has been constructed, and the                                           
establishment is in operation.  As discussed above under "1.                                        
Artesian Water," the agency may promulgate regulations for the                                      
efficient enforcement of the act under section 701(a) of the act.                                   
Although it is possible to determine that a source of water is a                                    
spring after the bore hole is in operation, in some cases it                                        
would be onerous for regulatory officials to do so.  Therefore,                                     
FDA has determined that a requirement to demonstrate the                                            
hydraulic connection between the bore hole and the spring's                                         
natural orifice is necessary for the efficient enforcement of the                                   
act.                                                                                                
     As FDA has stated, a food manufacturer is responsible for                                      
the accuracy of its food labels (58 FR 2079, 2163, and 2165                                         
January 6, 1993).  Indeed, placing a claim in food labeling that                                    
calls the consumers's attention to a water's source is a                                            
representation that the manufacturer has evidence that the                                          
product meets the requirements for the claim.  See Thompson                                         
Medical Co., Inc. v. FTC, 791 F.2d 189, 193 (D.C. Cir. 1986),                                       
cert. denied, 479 U.S. 1086 (1987).  Thus, making a claim without                                   
such a basis would be misleading and in violation of section                                        
403(a) of the act.                                                                                  
     The evidence that manufacturers compile in response to the                                     
requirement in  165.110(a)(2)(vi) that they be able to                                             
demonstrate to regulatory officials that a measurable hydraulic                                     
connection exists between the bore hole and the natural spring                                      
orifice (see comment 43 of this document) should also establish                                     
that the spring is the source of water for the bore hole.  To                                       
comply with this requirement, producers may maintain records that                                   
demonstrate that a measurable hydraulic connection does indeed                                      
exist between the natural orifice and the bore hole.  In                                            
addition, many States and the United States Geological Survey may                                   
have records of the development of some springs and the geology                                     
of the surrounding area.  Records or a certification statement                                      
from a professional hydrogeologist or the drilling company that                                     
drilled the holes are appropriate sources of documentation.  In                                     
addition, manufacturers may use methods such as the dye tracer                                      
test to demonstrate the hydraulic connection during an                                              
inspection.                                                                                         
     If the source does not meet the definition of spring water                                     
then the product must not be labeled as "spring water," or it is                                    
misbranded under sections 403(a), 403(b), and 403(g) of the act.                                    
Compliance with this provision does not entail the creation of                                      
any new information or the compilation of any special records.                                      
Rather, the requirement would obligate manufacturers simply to                                      
have access to information that they should already possess and                                     
be able to provide FDA with this information upon request.                                          
     51.  Several comments expressed concern about the                                              
requirements that spring water be "from the same underground                                        
stratum," "retain all the physical properties," and "be of the                                      
same composition and quality."  They stated that these                                              
requirements are too general and are undefined, leaving many                                        
questions relative to acceptable differences in such parameters                                     
as temperature, pH, turbidity, hardness, iron content, and                                          
calcium content.  One comment stated that it will be difficult                                      
for FDA or any other government agency to monitor the conditions                                    
required for "spring water."                                                                        
     One comment requested clarification of the requirement in                                      
part 129 that product and source waters be approved by State                                        
regulatory agencies having approval authority.  It asked whether                                    
the proposed regulations mandated approval of the bore hole and                                     
the spring, whether the spring must be validated as a natural                                       
spring, and whether engineering had to be performed to protect                                      
the spring site if a bore hole is to be utilized.  The comment                                      
stated that there is no reference to continuous maintenance of                                      
the spring.  Comments asked how many, and at what frequency,                                        
tests are necessary to show that water from the bore hole is                                        
identical to water from the spring.                                                                 
     Comments stated that manufacturers should present geological                                   
information about the vicinity of the orifice and bore hole so                                      
that the State can devise a representative set of water quality                                     
analyses specific to the situation.                                                                 
     FDA notes that the source is approved by the government                                        
agency or agencies having jurisdiction ( 129.3(a)), and that in                                    
many cases, it will be a State agency.  However, the approval                                       
mandated under part 129 is to inspect the source and sample the                                     
water to ascertain that the water is of a safe and sanitary                                         
quality.  Firms are responsible for ensuring that their products                                    
comply with the particular source requirements in                                                   
 165.110(a)(2)(vi).  As discussed previously, the bottled water                                    
firm must be able to demonstrate to regulatory officials that a                                     
measurable hydraulic connection exists between the bore hole and                                    
the natural spring, and that the water complies in all other                                        
respects with  165.110(a)(2)(vi).                                                                  
     Concerning continuous maintenance of the spring, the firm is                                   
responsible for ensuring that their products comply with all                                        
applicable regulations.  The quality of the source water is                                         
critical to the quality of the final product.  Without proper                                       
maintenance of the spring, the quality of the source water will                                     
decrease, and the firm is taking a risk that the water will not                                     
meet FDA requirements.  Thus it is in the interest of the firm to                                   
maintain the source in appropriate condition.                                                       
     In regards to methods of testing for comparative purposes,                                     
one or more hydrogeologically valid methods may be used as                                          
appropriate to verify that the product is in compliance.                                            
However, not all methods may be suitable for different geologic                                     
regions or for the specific bore hole site.  Therefore, the                                         
agency is not recommending or requiring any specific method or                                      
methods.                                                                                            
     Under  165.110(a)(2)(vi), manufacturers must be able to                                       
demonstrate, upon request, to regulatory officials that there is                                    
a measurable hydraulic connection between the natural spring and                                    
the bore hole.  This verification must be current to be                                             
satisfactory.  It is the responsibility of the firm to be in                                        
compliance at all times.                                                                            
     52.  Two comments asked for clarification of whether water                                     
emerging at the surface not as a result of flow from an                                             
underground formation or aquifer, but as the result of seepage                                      
from a higher elevation surface water source reemerging at a                                        
lower elevation, is really spring water (e.g., springs fed by                                       
higher level lakes; underground creeks popping up to the surface;                                   
or other surface water that originates high in a mountain which                                     
emerges at a lower elevation).                                                                      
     The agency considers that surface water from a higher                                          
elevation reemerging through a natural orifice at a lower                                           
elevation is spring water if the water has traveled sufficiently                                    
through the ground so as not to be under the direct influence of                                    
surface water.  According to 40 CFR 141.2, ground water under the                                   
direct influence of surface water means any water beneath the                                       
surface of the ground with:  (1)  Significant occurrence of                                         
insects or other macroorganisms, algae, or large diameter                                           
pathogens such as Giardia lamblia; or (2) significant and                                           
relatively rapid shifts in water characteristics such as                                            
turbidity, temperature, conductivity, or pH which closely                                           
correlate to climatological or surface water conditions.  The                                       
existence of any of these factors indicates that the source is                                      
under the direct influence of surface water and is, therefore,                                      
not a ground water source that meets the definition of "spring                                      
water."                                                                                             
     A spring is water from an underground source that flows                                        
naturally to the surface of the earth.  Under normal conditions,                                    
aquifers feeding springs are in a stable environment.  On the                                       
other hand, surface water is subject to a changing environment                                      
and may assimilate these changes.  Thus, if water flowing                                           
naturally to the surface of the earth exhibits the                                                  
characteristics of surface water, it does not comply with the                                       
definition of "spring water" in  165.110(a)(2)(vi) and is not                                      
spring water.                                                                                       
     53.  One comment claimed that some members of industry                                         
consider any wet location on an otherwise dry mountainside or                                       
flat pasture to be a spring.  The comment stated that sometimes                                     
these wet spots can bead water, producing a small trickle.  The                                     
comment contended that after development, these wet spots can                                       
sometimes produce a considerable flow of water.  It also stated                                     
that water has been known to come up in natural depressions in                                      
hillsides without flowing until the water is pumped.  The comment                                   
requested clarification on these questions.  It asked whether any                                   
alteration to the natural terrain that results in water coming                                      
spontaneously to the surface of the alteration should be deemed a                                   
spring (e.g., a road cut into a mountain and in this cut water                                      
trickles (or gushes) out).                                                                          
     FDA is defining "spring water" in  165.110(a)(2)(vi) as                                       
water derived from an underground formation from which water                                        
flows naturally to the surface of the earth.  There must be a                                       
natural force causing the water to flow to the surface through a                                    
natural orifice.  If the water does not flow to the surface of                                      
the earth from the underground source without development of the                                    
area or the use of external force, then the water does not                                          
qualify for use of the name "spring water."                                                         
     54.  One comment complained that the January 5, 1993                                           
proposal, if adopted, would be yet another Federal mandate,                                         
without Federal funding, to State agencies having the                                               
responsibility of ensuring compliance.  It stated that                                              
justification for additional program expenditures must be based                                     
on need and public safety.  The comment stated that there has                                       
been no evidence presented that adoption of the proposed rules                                      
would increase product safety.                                                                      
     One comment stated that the very general nature of FDA's                                       
proposal would create problems for regulatory agencies attempting                                   
to implement and enforce the rule by generating additional                                          
workload, controversy within the bottled water industry, and                                        
legal battles over whether a "bore hole" is tapping "spring                                         
water" or "well water."                                                                             
     Comments stated that the use of a bore hole in the                                             
collection of spring water would make enforcement of the                                            
provision not only expensive but most difficult.                                                    
     The agency disagrees that it is imposing a burden on State                                     
regulatory agencies by establishing a standard of identity for                                      
spring water.  There is no requirement that a State ensure that a                                   
firm is complying with FDA regulations.  However, a State may                                       
elect to enforce  165.110 under section 310(b) of the act (21                                      
U.S.C. 337).                                                                                        
     In response to comments, the agency has added provisions to                                    
its definition of spring water that make it more specific and                                       
that should make its requirements more understandable both to the                                   
regulated and the regulators.  Manufacturers must identify the                                      
location of the spring; there must be evidence that the water is                                    
flowing naturally to the surface through a natural orifice; firms                                   
must demonstrate and be able to verify to regulatory officials                                      
that there is a measurable hydraulic connection between the bore                                    
hole and the natural spring; and water must continue to flow                                        
naturally to the surface of the earth through the springs'                                          
natural orifice.  FDA concludes that these provisions will aid in                                   
enforcement of the definition of "spring water."                                                    
f.  Contamination and sanitary bottling                                                             
     55.  A number of comments disagreed with FDA's statement in                                    
the preamble to the proposal that use of a bore hole will reduce                                    
the possibility of contamination and is an aid in the sanitary                                      
bottling of spring water (58 FR 393 at 399).  Two comments argued                                   
that the available evidence did not support that a bore hole is a                                   
more sanitary method to collect spring water than a collection                                      
box.  Comments stated that a properly engineered and constructed                                    
spring collection box system can adequately protect a natural                                       
spring from outside microbial contamination.                                                        
     A comment stated that if the quality of spring water is an                                     
issue, then it can and should be addressed by quality standards                                     
rather than by altering the common definition of spring water to                                    
permit use of a bore hole.  It argued that the evidence of record                                   
on this rule does not justify any departure from the accepted                                       
definitions of "spring" and "spring water."  Another comment stated that with respect to bore holes
 serving as an aid in the                                                                           
sanitary bottling of the water, FDA already has provisions for                                      
this purpose in part 129.  It stated that bore holes as aids in                                     
sanitary bottling of water should not be a consideration under                                      
the standard of identity.                                                                           
     Another comment stated that the proposed rule provides no                                      
specifications for the construction of bore holes, and that, if                                     
improperly constructed, sources of contamination could enter the                                    
aquifer through the bore hole.  It stated that the technology                                       
exists to protect a spring water source at its point of                                             
discharge, and that treatment systems can be incorporated at the                                    
point of discharge to provide protection from a number of types                                     
of potential contaminants.                                                                          
     The agency points out that both properly engineered and                                        
constructed bore holes and properly engineered and constructed                                      
spring collection boxes are appropriate methods to collect spring                                   
water.  However, in some circumstances, use of a bore hole                                          
instead of a collection box will reduce the possibility of                                          
contamination and thus aid in the sanitary bottling of the water.                                   
For example, springs may surface in areas where it would be                                         
difficult to collect the water at the orifice without                                               
contaminating the water.  In such cases, use of a bore hole can                                     
be an effective means to extract the water in a sanitary manner.                                    
In all cases the processing and bottling of drinking water must                                     
comply with part 129.                                                                               
     FDA agrees with the comments that stated that sanitation is                                    
a function of GMP and not a standard of identity.  The agency                                       
stated in the preamble of the proposed rule that the use of a                                       
bore hole would reduce the possibility of contamination and would                                   
be an aid in the sanitary bottling of the water (58 FR 393 at                                       
399), but the intent of this statement was not to say that use of                                   
a bore hole is a superior method of collecting the water.                                           
Rather, the agency was saying that even though the geological                                       
definition of "spring water" does not provide for bore holes, it                                    
is a good idea to include their use in the definition of "spring                                    
water" because it would provide an alternative sanitary means of                                    
extracting the water.  Thus, the statement was intended to be a                                     
basis for what the agency was proposing to do, not to be an end                                     
in itself.  The usefulness of bore holes is one of several                                          
factors that have convinced the agency that it is appropriate to                                    
include water collected by means of their use in the definition                                     
of "spring water."                                                                                  
     External force is often used with bore holes to extract the                                    
water.  To clarify the agency's intent that use of bore holes,                                      
including those using external force, or properly engineered and                                    
constructed spring collection box systems must adequately protect                                   
the water, FDA is modifying  165.110(a)(2)(vi) to remove any                                       
inference that manufacturers may use external force to protect                                      
the water.  Under part 129, any method of collection of spring                                      
water must protect the water ( 129.35(a)(1)).                                                      
     The agency is not providing detailed specifications for the                                    
construction of bore holes or for the construction of spring                                        
collection boxes.  Appropriate construction specifications may                                      
vary according to the site.  However, construction of either type                                   
of collection mechanism must be in accordance with current good                                     
engineering practice.  In addition, under  129.3(a), the source                                    
water must be of a safe and sanitary quality.  Proper                                               
construction will greatly assist in complying with this                                             
requirement.                                                                                        
     56.  Comments asserted that a main concern is that drilling                                    
a bore hole next to a free flowing spring orifice may create a                                      
hydraulic connection or direct communication between any nearby                                     
surface water (river, creek, lake, pond, or swamp) and the spring                                   
source and, thus serve only to increase the risk of                                                 
contamination.  Comments were concerned about altering the                                          
patterns of recharge by the use of external force and lowering                                      
the quality of the water as a result.  One comment stated that                                      
the use of bore hole collection systems runs contrary to the                                        
standards set by EPA regulations (40 CFR part 141) because,                                         
almost by definition, the bore hole will be shallow, and it can                                     
be sited near surface waters created by the discharging spring.                                     
     Conversely, one comment stated that, in a properly equipped                                    
bore hole, reverse ground water flow from the surface should not                                    
occur.  It stated that pumping may change the flow of ground                                        
water in a horizontal direction within the aquifer, specifically                                    
within the cone of depression created by pumping, and that if a                                     
bore hole is properly equipped and managed, vertical movement of                                    
surface water downward into the screen will not occur.  It added                                    
that properly equipped bore holes are accepted by both Federal                                      
and State agencies as safe supplies of both domestic and                                            
municipal drinking water.                                                                           
     FDA agrees that the potential exists for improper recharge                                     
of an aquifer feeding a spring.  Water recharge is an issue that                                    
must be considered during source approval because there is the                                      
potential that the recharge may come from surface sources that                                      
may contaminate the underground source.  For source approval, the                                   
government agency having jurisdiction must determine whether the                                    
water will be of a safe and sanitary quality.  The States,                                          
however, have experience with issues of this type.                                                  
     The establishment of a definition for "spring water" does                                      
not have any effect on the State's burden in reviewing a site for                                   
approval, whether a bore hole or a collection box is to be used.                                    
The State's decision on whether to approve a source has nothing                                     
to do with how water collected from that source and bottled is to                                   
be labeled.  That decision is made by the bottler, subject to the                                   
definitions in  165.110(a)(2)(vi) and the scrutiny of FDA.                                         
     57.  One comment stated that the language of the proposed                                      
rule creates the impression that spring water may be collected                                      
from the surface, which is unlikely, and that bottlers may bottle                                   
untreated surface water.  The comment stated that surface water                                     
intended for drinking must undergo treatment that may result in                                     
alteration of the original chemical properties of the water,                                        
which would destroy the product's identity as "spring water" in                                     
the public's perception.  It recommended that the following                                         
language be added to the definition of spring water:  "After                                        
treatment, spring water shall maintain the same physical                                            
properties and chemical composition as the water that does or                                       
would flow naturally to the surface of the earth."                                                  
     FDA disagrees with the comment.  Spring water may be                                           
collected from the surface by means of a collection box.  A                                         
properly engineered collection box captures the water as it                                         
surfaces, before it can be contaminated by surface elements and                                     
become surface water.  However, spring water collected under the                                    
most sanitary conditions may still require some treatment.                                          
     The definition of "spring water" is based on the underground                                   
source of the water.  Thus, water meeting the definition of                                         
"spring water" in  165.110(a)(2)(vi) would remain spring water                                     
after treatment, even if the physical properties and chemical                                       
composition of the water are altered from such treatment.  For                                      
example, ozonation is commonly used to treat bottled water and                                      
may cause some dissolved minerals, such as manganese, to                                            
precipitate.  Other treatments, such as filtering, may also cause                                   
changes in the water.  As long as the water meets the definition                                    
of "spring water," however, even though it has been treated, it                                     
may be called "spring water."                                                                       
     In the case of spring water extracted from a bore hole, the                                    
water must be compared with the water extracted from the natural                                    
spring.  When that comparison occurs, either before or after any                                    
treatment, may have a significant impact on whether the water                                       
collected from the bore hole maintains the same physical                                            
properties and chemical composition as the water from the natural                                   
orifice.  To clarify the intent of the regulation,  FDA is                                          
modifying  165.110(a)(2)(vi) to state that, before treatment,                                      
the water collected from the bore hole must have the same                                           
physical properties and chemical composition and quality as water                                   
from the natural spring.                                                                            
     However under section 201(n) of the act, if the water has                                      
been treated in such a way that it differs significantly from the                                   
source water, regardless of whether that source water is from a                                     
natural spring or a bore hole, the fact that that alteration has                                    
been made is a fact material in light of representations made and                                   
must appear on the label of the product.  The water is no longer                                    
unmodified spring water and differs significantly from the water                                    
that was harvested.  Therefore, the fact that the water has been                                    
altered significantly must be disclosed in the statement of                                         
identity, so that consumers are aware that the source water has                                     
been modified.  If minerals have been added, the statement of                                       
identity must state that fact.  If minerals have been removed                                       
from the product, other than those that are removed during normal                                   
processing (e.g., filtration to remove precipitates), that fact                                     
must be included in the statement of identity of the product as                                     
well (e.g., demineralized) ( 165.110(a)(2)(iv)).                                                   
5.  Well Water                                                                                     
     FDA proposed that the name of bottled water from a hole                                        
bored, drilled, or otherwise constructed in the ground that taps                                    
the water of an aquifer may be "well water."  The agency received                                   
no comments requesting modifications to this source definition.                                     
Therefore, the definition for "well water" is the same as FDA                                       
proposed (58 FR 393), although it is now codified at                                                
 165.110(a)(2)(viii) as a result of the additions that FDA has                                     
made to  165.110(a)(2).                                                                            
6.  Other Water Definitions                                                                         
     58.  Several comments urged FDA to define "natural water."                                     
Comments suggested that "natural water" means bottled spring,                                       
artesian, mineral, or well water that is unmodified by mineral                                      
addition or deletion, except that "natural water" may be filtered                                   
and must be sanitized with ozone or an equivalent disinfection                                      
process and treated to reduce the concentration of any substance                                    
that exceeds an allowable level established by the agency.                                          
     One comment urged FDA to define "natural water" as in the                                      
IBWA Model Code.  IBWA defines "natural water" as spring,                                           
mineral, artesian, or well water that is derived from an                                            
underground formation and that is not derived from a municipal                                      
system or public water supply.                                                                      
     Some comments recommended that FDA define "natural" for use                                    
on bottled water labels because the term is often used on labels                                    
and may be misused.  One comment stated that water to be called                                     
and labeled "natural" must come from the ground and may be                                          
sanitized with ozone or an equivalent disinfection process.  It added that any removal of excessive 
substances should not allow                                                                         
that water to be labeled as "natural."  Another comment stated                                      
that the word "natural" should be used only if the mineral                                          
content of the water is not altered during the production                                           
process.  Therefore, distilled, purified, or drinking water                                         
products that use reverse osmosis to remove solids, then add back                                   
minerals, could not be described as "natural."                                                      
     One comment suggested that FDA provide for the use of the                                      
term "natural" in conjunction with "mineral water" (i.e.,                                           
"natural mineral water") as it is allowed in the European                                           
standard.  The comment stated that consumers want to be assured                                     
that the product that they are purchasing is from a natural                                         
source and has not been blended or manipulated in any fashion                                       
with surface or municipal water sources.  The comment added that                                    
the use of the term "natural" also implies that, because of the                                     
bacterial purity of the product, chemical disinfection is not                                       
necessary.                                                                                          
     Two comments suggested the addition of the word "natural" to                                   
the definition of "spring water" to fully ensure that the spring                                    
water has the same composition, whether collected through a bore                                    
hole or at the surface, and that it has not been treated except                                     
for the addition of carbon dioxide or the removal of iron and                                       
manganese and suspended solids.                                                                     
     However, two comments stated that the term "natural water"                                     
should not be permitted on a label because consumers do not                                         
understand what it means.                                                                           
     The agency considered establishing a definition for                                            
"natural" in a proposal on food labeling that it published in the                                   
FEDERAL REGISTER of November 27, 1991 (56 FR 60421 at 60466),                                       
because of the widespread use of the term and the evidence that                                     
consumers regard many uses of this term as noninformative.  After                                   
considering the comments that it received in response to the                                        
November 27, 1991 proposal, the agency stated that if the term                                      
"natural" were adequately defined, the ambiguity surrounding use                                    
of this term that results in misleading claims could be abated                                      
(58 FR 2302 at 2407, January 6, 1993).  Because of resource                                         
limitations and other agency priorities, however, FDA did not                                       
undertake rulemaking to define "natural" at that time.  The                                         
agency stated that, while it regarded the term as meaning that                                      
nothing artificial or synthetic has been included in, or has been                                   
added to, a food that would not normally be expected to be in the                                   
food, it would maintain its policy of not restricting the use of                                    
the term except as provided for in  101.22 (id.).                                                  
     A number of States, AFDO, and IBWA have defined "natural                                       
water" (Refs. 2, 7, 11, 12, 14, and 15).  All of the definitions                                    
require that the water be derived from an underground formation                                     
(spring, artesian, or well water) and be unmodified except for                                      
limited treatment (e.g., filtration and ozonation or equivalent                                     
disinfection process).  Those States that have adopted the IBWA                                     
model regulation as their State regulation provide for treatment                                    
of "natural water" to reduce the concentration of any substance                                     
that exceeds safety standards.  The IBWA model regulation also                                      
states that the water "may be collected and transported by pumps,                                   
pipes, tunnels, trucks, or similar devices."                                                        
     The Codex Standard for Natural Mineral Waters and Edible                                       
Ices and Ice Mixes (Codex Standard) (Ref. 1) defines "natural                                       
mineral water" and "naturally carbonated natural mineral water."                                    
These waters are obtained from underground water-bearing strata                                     
either through natural flow or drilling.  Treatments permitted                                      
for "natural mineral water" under the Codex standard include                                        
separation from unstable constituents by decantation or                                             
filtration that is, if necessary, accelerated by previous                                           
aeration.                                                                                           
     The agency finds that the IBWA code and State requirements                                     
are basically consistent with FDA's informal policy on "natural"                                    
because the product is only minimally processed.  However, there                                    
are some surface waters (e.g., water collected from glacier                                         
runoff) that may only require minimal processing to be acceptable                                   
bottled waters and, thus could qualify to be called "natural."                                      
Most surface waters and ground waters under the influence of                                        
surface water require additional processing to ensure that the                                      
water is consistent in quality and, thus could not be labeled as                                    
"natural."  Therefore, because FDA's informal policy already                                        
encompasses bottled water, the agency concludes that it is not                                      
necessary to establish a regulation that specifically defines                                       
"natural" for use with bottled water.                                                               
     59.  One comment noted that no consideration was given to                                      
the proper use of the word "pure."  It stated that many bottlers                                    
misuse this word.                                                                                   
     The agency advises that while there is no specific                                             
prohibition against the use of the term "pure," it has                                              
discouraged the use of the term because it is ambiguous and may                                     
be misleading (58 FR 2897 at 2903).  For example, "spring water"                                    
and "pure spring water" may be identical foods, but "pure," as                                      
applied to the food, implies that other identical products are                                      
"impure" or "not pure" if they do not bear the same term on their                                   
label.  In addition, the agency notes that the term "pure" may be                                   
confused with the term "purified," and consumers may be misled                                      
into believing that bottled water labeled as "pure" has been                                        
treated to substantially decrease the total dissolved solids                                        
content.                                                                                            
     The agency is not convinced that it should use its resources                                   
to define the term "pure" at this time but will continue to                                         
discourage its use.  In addition, the agency will continue to                                       
deal with this issue on a case-by-case basis.                                                       
     60.  Two comments asked what bottled waters made by using                                      
well water for a source, and then diluting the water with                                           
distilled or purified water to improve hardness and taste, could                                    
be called.                                                                                          
     Blends of different types of water, such as well water and                                     
purified water, may be appropriately labeled as "bottled water"                                     
or "drinking water."  Truthful statements may also be made on the                                   
label to inform consumers that the product is blended, with the                                     
percentage of each type of water included.                                                          
     61.  Two comments stated that the name "mountain water"                                        
should not be permitted on the label because it is misleading to                                    
consumers.                                                                                          
     The agency is not providing for the use of the term                                            
"mountain water" as the name of a bottled water product.  The                                       
name of the product is "bottled water," "drinking water," or one                                    
or more of the terms defined in  165.110(a)(2) as appropriate.                                     
However, if the water is from a mountain source, manufacturers                                      
may include a truthful and nonmisleading statement reflecting                                       
that fact.                                                                                          
     62.  One comment stated that there are bottlers in Canada                                      
and Alaska that bottle "glacier water" and asked whether they                                       
could continue to use this term to label their bottled water.  It                                   
provided a definition for "glaciofluvial" as "of or relating to                                     
or coming from streams deriving much or all of their water from                                     
the melting of a glacier."  The comment stated that minerals are                                    
rarely detectable in this water, let alone environmental                                            
pollutants, and noted that the water requires little if any                                         
filtration.  The comments said that the water is passed through                                     
ozonation or ultraviolet light as a precaution for total and                                        
fecal coliform bacterial counts.                                                                    
     FDA notes that the definition that the comment provided is                                     
not a clear definition because, under it, not all of the water                                      
need come from the melting of the glacier, and the percentage of                                    
the water actually coming from the glacier would vary                                               
significantly according to the season of the year.  Therefore,                                      
FDA is not providing for this term.                                                                 
     FDA notes that manufacturers that bottle this category of                                      
water may state in the labeling that the source of the water is                                     
glaciofluvial.  However, the statement of identity for the                                          
product is "bottled water" or "drinking water."                                                     
                    D.  Other Label Statements                                                      
1.  Mineral Content of Mineral Water                                                                
     The agency tentatively concluded in the January 1993                                           
proposal that the listing of relative mineral content is useful                                     
to consumers to characterize a given mineral water product.  FDA                                    
proposed to require that if the TDS is below 500 ppm, the                                           
statement "low mineral content" appear on the label.  In                                            
addition, the agency proposed that if the TDS of mineral water is                                   
more than 1,500 ppm, the statement "high mineral content" must                                      
appear on the label.  FDA did not propose to define the term                                        
"light" or other descriptive terms as they apply to mineral water                                   
because FDA tentatively concluded that the use of only the                                          
statements "low mineral content" and "high mineral content" would                                   
be less confusing to consumers.  FDA proposed that the statement                                    
of mineral content appear on the principal display panel                                            
following the statement of identity in type at least one-half the                                   
size of the type used for the statement of identity but in no                                       
case of less than one-sixteenth of an inch.  The agency requested                                   
comments concerning the proposed levels defining high or low                                        
mineral content.                                                                                    
     63.  A number of comments noted that  165.110(a)(3)(i)                                        
concerning the labeling of a product as "low mineral content" or                                    
"high mineral content," does not refer solely to "mineral water"                                    
and objected to this labeling if it were to apply to all bottled                                    
waters.  One comment stated that the statement "low mineral                                         
content" would be misleading on products such as "artesian                                          
water," "spring water," "well water," or "bottled water" when                                       
they in no way claim to be mineral water, and this statement                                        
would imply a less-than-normal mineral content.  One comment                                        
recommended that the regulation state "if the TDS content of                                        
mineral water is below * * *," so that the regulation only would                                    
apply to products labeled as mineral water.                                                         
     FDA agrees with the comments.  The normal mineral content of                                   
artesian water, spring water, well water, bottled water, or any                                     
other bottled water product except for the majority of mineral                                      
waters is less than 500 ppm TDS.  In fact, bottled water, except                                    
for mineral water, must comply with the provisions in the quality                                   
standard for bottled water that require that if the product                                         
contains more than 500 ppm TDS, the product be labeled as                                           
substandard ( 165.110(b)(4) and (c)).  In the preamble to the                                     
proposal, the agency only discussed labeling a product as "low                                      
mineral content" or "high mineral content" if the product was                                       
"mineral water" (58 FR 393 at 397), although the agency failed to                                   
specifically mention in the regulation that it applied only to                                      
"mineral water."  This failure was an oversight.  Therefore, the                                    
agency is modifying  165.110(a)(3)(i) to state that if the total                                   
dissolved solids (TDS) content of mineral water is below 500 ppm,                                   
or if it is greater than 1,500 ppm, the statement "low mineral                                      
content" or "high mineral content", respectively, shall appear on                                   
the principal display panel.                                                                        
     64.  A number of comments objected to the labeling of                                          
mineral water as "low mineral content" and "high mineral content"                                   
and requested that  165.110(a)(3)(i) be deleted because this                                       
labeling would be confusing to consumers.  One comment opposed                                      
denoting the "low" or "high" mineral content of mineral water                                       
because flavor is more affected by specific minerals than by TDS.                                   
     FDA disagrees that the label statements concerning low or                                      
high mineral content should be deleted from the regulation.  As                                     
discussed previously, the agency is requiring that mineral water                                    
contain a certain amount of minerals because consumers expect                                       
that mineral water contains some minerals.  Because the mineral                                     
content of mineral water may vary greatly, and because the high                                     
and low ends of the range of mineral contents may have a                                            
significant bearing on the characteristics of the water, the                                        
agency concludes that information about the mineral level is a                                      
material fact, under section 201(n) of the act, in conjunction                                      
with the term "mineral water."  The agency's action establishes                                     
three broad categories, but only manufacturers of mineral waters                                    
below 500 ppm TDS or above 1500 ppm TDS need provide the                                            
additional information on the label.                                                                
     FDA agrees that the taste of some mineral waters may be                                        
affected more by specific minerals than by total mineral content.                                   
Nevertheless, if a mineral water contains less than 500 ppm TDS,                                    
it is important that consumers be made aware that the product has                                   
a low mineral content, and that it may not have the mineral taste                                   
that another mineral water may have.  Many State regulations have                                   
required that mineral water contain more than 500 ppm TDS                                           
(Ref. 8), and most mineral water sold in the United States has                                      
complied with this minimum so that it could be sold in those                                        
particular States.  Therefore, FDA concludes that the use of the                                    
statement "low mineral content" on mineral water containing less                                    
than 500 ppm TDS is appropriate to alert consumers to the fact                                      
that the water may have a lower mineral content than mineral                                        
waters that they have previously purchased.                                                         
     Additionally, the agency notes that, as discussed in the                                       
proposal to this final rule (58 FR 393 at 397), a mineral content                                   
of over 1500 ppm TDS greatly affects the taste of the water no                                      
matter what the specific minerals may be.  Therefore, the agency                                    
concludes that because this information is a material fact,                                         
consumers should be informed that the product contains a high                                       
mineral content.                                                                                    
     65.  Two comments held that the statement "low mineral                                         
content water" on mineral water could be misleading to some                                         
consumers if, for example, they interpret it as saying that the                                     
water is low in sodium.  The comment stated that low mineral                                        
content mineral waters may be relatively high in sodium.                                            
     FDA disagrees that the statement "low mineral content" would                                   
be misleading to consumers.  The term "low" in this statement is                                    
referring to the overall total dissolved solids content and not                                     
to any specific mineral.  However, the agency agrees that some                                      
mineral waters containing between 250 and 500 ppm TDS may contain                                   
more than an insignificant amount of sodium.  Under  101.9(a),                                     
nutrition labeling is required if the product contains more than                                    
an insignificant amount of any nutrient that is required to be                                      
included in the declaration of nutrition information under                                          
 101.9(c).  If a product labeled as "low mineral content" is not                                   
sodium free (i.e., contains 5 or more mg sodium per serving),                                       
nutrition labeling is mandatory, and consumers will be informed                                     
that, although the product is low in mineral content, it contains                                   
more than an insignificant amount of sodium.                                                        
     66.  Four comments asked whether mineral waters with a                                         
mineral content greater than 1,500 ppm could be labeled as "rich                                    
in mineral salts."                                                                                  
     Another comment stated there may be confusion about the term                                   
"high mineral content" because it appears to be substantially                                       
similar to nutrient content claims that are allowed under the                                       
Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 (the 1990                                              
amendments), and in fact it may be misinterpreted by many                                           
consumers as an indication that the product may be useful as a                                      
mineral supplement.                                                                                 
     The agency finds no merit to these comments.  In the FEDERAL                                   
REGISTER of January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2302 at 2414), FDA adopted                                       
 101.54(b)(1), which defines the terms "high," "rich in," and                                      
"excellent source of" to mean that the food contains 20 percent                                     
or more of the reference daily intake (RDI) or the daily                                            
reference value (DRV) of the nutrient in question per reference                                     
amount customarily consumed.  The claim "high mineral content" is                                   
not subject to  101.54 because the term does not describe the                                      
nutrient content of the water.  FDA has not defined nutrient                                        
content claims for minerals as a category, only for individual                                      
minerals.  While FDA has authorized some nutrient content claims                                    
concerning mineral content of foods, such as "high in three                                         
minerals," it has not authorized "high mineral content."  Thus,                                     
this claim only applies to mineral water.                                                           
     There is no authorization in FDA's regulations for use of a                                    
synonym for "high" in the statement "high mineral content" for                                      
bottled water because the statement is not a nutrient content                                       
claim but part of the statement of identity of the product.  The                                    
term "rich" is not appropriate in this context because it means                                     
that a product is abundantly supplied with something of value.                                      
Although the terms "high," "rich in," and "excellent source of"                                     
have been defined as synonymous nutrient content claims, not all                                    
of these terms are appropriate when used to describe the mineral                                    
content of mineral water containing more than 1500 ppm TDS                                          
because such water may not be an "excellent" or "rich" source of                                    
minerals of nutritional significance.  Use of the term "high                                        
mineral content," however, provides a quantitative contrast to                                      
the term "low mineral content" of mineral water containing less                                     
than 500 ppm TDS.                                                                                   
     Therefore, FDA concludes that only the declaration "high                                       
mineral content" is appropriate for mineral water.  Given that                                      
the statement is part of the statement of identity of the                                           
product, FDA has not provided for the use of synonyms.  The                                         
statement appropriately should be as simple and as                                                  
straightforward as possible.                                                                        
     67.  One comment stated that 1,500 ppm TDS as the triggering                                   
level for the label statement "high mineral content" is an                                          
extremely high level.  The comment suggested that the statement                                     
"exceeds the secondary maximum contaminant level of 500 ppm," for                                   
mineral water containing greater than 500 ppm TDS, is a better                                      
disclosure and would help to eliminate consumer confusion over                                      
the differences in water quality standards between bottled water                                    
and public tap water.                                                                               
     The agency disagrees with the comment.  The term "mineral                                      
water" has traditionally implied that the water has a higher                                        
mineral content than most water, including public tap water.  As                                    
discussed in the proposal (58 FR 393 at 397), all water contains                                    
some minerals, unless it has been demineralized (Ref. 16).  Thus,                                   
the agency tentatively concluded that consumers expect that a                                       
product identified as "mineral water" would contain at least a                                      
minimum level of minerals.  This expectation is reinforced by the                                   
fact that some States (Ref. 8) have only included water that                                        
contains more than 500 ppm TDS in their definition of "mineral                                      
water."                                                                                             
     The label declaration "high mineral content" is to inform                                      
consumers that the mineral content is high in comparison to other                                   
mineral waters.  As discussed in the proposal (58 FR 393 at 397),                                   
a mineral content of more that 1,500 ppm TDS greatly affects the                                    
flavor of the water.  This level is consistent with the European                                    
Community definition of "mineral water--rich in mineral salts"                                      
(Ref. 17) and will not hinder international trade.  Thus, the                                       
comment has not persuaded the agency that 500 ppm TDS is a more                                     
appropriate minimum level than 1,500 ppm TDS for a product                                          
labeled as "mineral water, high mineral content."                                                   
     Therefore, to ensure that consumers know that the product                                      
that they are purchasing is high in minerals as compared to other                                   
mineral waters, the agency is requiring in  165.110(a)(3)(i)                                       
that the label of mineral water containing more than 1,500 ppm                                      
TDS include the statement "high mineral content."                                                   
     68.  Several comments recommended that FDA require that TDS                                    
content appear on the label of all bottled waters because:                                          
(1)  Consumers will more easily relate bottled water designations                                   
to their specific TDS ranges, (2)  consumers will have a better                                     
chance of purchasing a bottled water corresponding to their                                         
tastes if they learn to associate a particular level of TDS with                                    
those tastes, and (3)  it renders unnecessary ruling that a                                         
mineral water with a TDS higher than 1500 ppm be labeled as "high                                   
mineral content."  One comment stated that consumers will rapidly                                   
relate TDS content values in the range of "thousand(s)" with a                                      
"high mineral taste" without the need for arbitrary qualifiers.                                     
It added that a TDS labeling requirement works towards                                              
establishing similar standards between Canada and the United                                        
States.                                                                                             
     One comment stated that it would be more informative to                                        
consumers to list the TDS in the side panel because concerned                                       
consumers want hard information, not generalities like the                                          
relative mineral content statements that the agency proposed.  It                                   
stated that there is a gray area between 250 and 500 ppm TDS in                                     
which some waters may taste distinctive and others may taste                                        
undistinctive, like low-TDS spring water.                                                           
     FDA disagrees that it should require mandatory declaration                                     
of TDS level.  The agency stated in the proposal that many                                          
consumers may not understand the relevance of a specific TDS and,                                   
thus, tentatively concluded that there is no substantive basis on                                   
which to require that this information appear on the label (58 FR                                   
393 at 397).  None of the comments provided any information that                                    
showed that consumers would understand the significance of this                                     
information and that would support a conclusion different than                                      
FDA's tentative determination.  However, the agency will not                                        
object if manufacturers include information concerning the TDS                                      
content, or any information relating to a distinctive taste of a                                    
specific product, on their labels as long as the information is                                     
truthful and not misleading.                                                                        
     Because many consumers will not understand the relevance of                                    
a specific TDS (Ref. 16), FDA concludes that the requirement to                                     
label mineral water as "low mineral content" or "high mineral                                       
content," as appropriate, will be generally more informative to                                     
consumers than TDS labeling.  Therefore, the agency concludes                                       
that mandatory labeling of TDS is not necessary, and that there                                     
is no substantive basis on which to require that this information                                   
appear on the label.                                                                                
     69.  One comment remarked that all bottled water should be                                     
labeled with the percentage of minerals present and the limits                                      
allowed.  Another comment encouraged actual content disclosure on                                   
bottled water labels, stating that consumers have a right to know                                   
whether any substance regulated under the Safe Drinking Water Act                                   
(the SDWA) is contained in the bottled water they purchase, even                                    
though it would have to be present at a level below the Maximum                                     
Contaminant Level (MCL) established as being permissible.                                           
     The agency disagrees that this additional labeling should be                                   
required.  MCL's have not been established for all minerals or                                      
other substances that may be in bottled water.  FDA established                                     
the standard of quality for bottled water to require that bottled                                   
water meet certain quality specifications or else be clearly                                        
labeled as "substandard."  The quality standard for bottled water                                   
is based on EPA's regulations for public drinking water (40 CFR                                     
parts 141 and 143), and EPA establishes its regulations based on                                    
health and aesthetic considerations.  Thus, any contaminant                                         
present at a level lower than its maximum allowable level is not                                    
considered a safety or quality concern.                                                             
     Given this fact, there is no basis to require the                                              
information that the comments requested.  The information would                                     
not be a material fact, and thus there would be no basis to claim                                   
that the product is misbranded if the information is not                                            
disclosed.  The presence of these substances in bottled water at                                    
levels meeting the quality standard is inconsequential.  The                                        
appearance of this information on the label may be confusing and                                    
may imply that the substance is present in excessive amounts when                                   
it is not.  Therefore, the agency concludes that the requested                                      
additional labeling is not warranted.                                                               
     70.  One comment requested that FDA add the following                                          
language to  165.110(a)(3)(i):  "Mineral water products falling                                    
between the TDS values of 500 to 1,500 mg/L do not have to add                                      
additional terms."                                                                                  
     The agency notes that mineral water containing more than 500                                   
ppm TDS and less than 1500 ppm TDS need not bear labeling on                                        
relative mineral content.  Although a specific statement to this                                    
effect is not necessary in the regulation, FDA is modifying                                         
 165.110(a)(3)(i) to state that if the TDS of mineral water is                                     
between 500 and 1,500 ppm, no additional statement need appear.                                     
The agency concludes that this modification will clarify the                                        
regulation.                                                                                         
     71.  One comment suggested that the producers of identified,                                   
sole-source bottled water products (e.g., artesian or mineral                                       
waters) that desire to market their products based on the                                           
naturally occurring mineral contents be allowed to label their                                      
products:  "Water with (or containing) naturally occurring                                          
minerals," provided that the product labeling clearly identifies                                    
the water's sole source and also identifies the naturally                                           
occurring minerals.  It stated that such mineral identification                                     
in the labeling of natural, identified sole-source water should                                     
not require additional nutrition information.                                                       
     The agency disagrees with the comment.  All water, unless it                                   
has been treated to remove minerals or has had minerals added,                                      
contains naturally occurring minerals, regardless of whether it                                     
comes from an identified single source.  A statement such as                                        
"water with naturally occurring minerals" has the potential to be                                   
misleading to consumers because it implies that the products of                                     
competitors may contain added minerals or have had minerals                                         
removed, when, in fact, they have not.  However, manufacturers                                      
may use the term "natural" on their bottled water labels if they                                    
follow FDA's informal policy as discussed previously (see comment                                   
58) of this document.                                                                               
     The agency is not defining the statement "water with                                           
naturally occurring minerals" for bottled water labels at this                                      
time because it has no basis to conclude that use of the                                            
statement would not be misleading, or that it would be useful to                                    
consumers.  The comment did not provide sufficient information on                                   
which to base a regulation.                                                                         
2.  Water From a Municipal Supply                                                                  
     The agency proposed to require that the phrase "from a                                         
municipal source" appear on the principal display panel or panels                                   
as a part of the name of the food if the water is obtained from a                                   
municipal water supply, except if the water has been treated to                                     
meet the definitions of distilled water or purified water (58 FR                                    
393 at 399).  FDA also proposed to require that the statement                                       
appear on the principal display panel following the statement of                                    
identity in type at least one-half the size of the type in which                                    
the statement of identity appears but in no case less than one-sixteenth of an inch.  The agency als
o proposed to require that                                                                          
the statement immediately and conspicuously precede or follow the                                   
name of the food without intervening written, printed, or graphic                                   
matter, other than statements required by proposed  165.110(c).                                    
     72.  Two comments suggested that FDA use the term "public                                      
water supply" as defined by EPA rather than use the term                                            
"municipal supply."  The comments noted that the use of the term                                    
"public water supply" would avoid confusion, as FDA would be                                        
using a term that is already defined and well understood.  One                                      
comment stated that questions could arise about the definition of                                   
a "municipal supply," such as how many people would a supply be                                     
required to serve to meet the definition of a "municipal supply."                                   
Another comment stated that the term "public water system" is a                                     
more appropriate term because it would include the numerous water                                   
systems that are independent water purveyors not affiliated with                                    
specific municipalities.                                                                            
     The agency disagrees that the statement "from a municipal                                      
source" should be replaced with "from a public water supply" or                                     
"from a public water system" in  165.110(a)(3)(ii).  EPA defines                                   
a "public water system" as a system that provides piped water for                                   
human consumption and that:  (1)  Has at least 15 service                                           
connections, or (2)  regularly serves at least 25 persons at                                        
least 60 days per year (40 CFR 141.2).  Public water systems are                                    
split into two categories:  Community and noncommunity water                                        
systems.  Community water systems are systems that regularly                                        
serve 25 or more year-round residents (or have at least 15                                          
service connections used by year-round residents) (40 CFR 141.2).                                   
Many factories, restaurants, schools, parks, and rest areas also                                    
operate their own supply of drinking water.  However, these                                         
systems do not have the required residential community and are,                                     
thus, considered noncommunity systems.                                                              
     There are two types of noncommunity water systems:                                             
Transient noncommunity or nontransient noncommunity (40 CFR                                         
141.2).  Transient noncommunity systems serve travelers and other                                   
transients at locations such as highway rest stops, small                                           
restaurants, and public parks.  The system serves at least 25                                       
people a day for at least 60 days per year but typically not the                                    
same 25 people each day (40 CFR 141.2).  On the other hand,                                         
nontransient noncommunity water systems do serve the same 25                                        
persons for at least 6 months a year but not on a year-round                                        
residential basis (40 CFR 141.2).  Schools and workplaces that                                      
have their own water supply and serve at least 25 of the same                                       
persons each day are examples of these systems.                                                     
     The agency stated in the proposal (58 FR 393 at 399) that                                      
information about the actual source of a bottled water product is                                   
a material fact in light of either the explicit (e.g., use of                                       
terms such as "spring" or "well") or implied (the presentation of                                   
the product in the bottle) representation made by a bottled water                                   
product that the product is not tap water.  Information about the                                   
source of the water is necessary to ensure that consumers do not                                    
incorrectly assume that because water is sold in a bottle it is                                     
not tap water.                                                                                      
     According to 40 CFR 142.2, a "municipality" means a city,                                      
town, or other public body created by, or pursuant to, State law.                                   
Municipal water sources are systems that serve municipalities.                                      
Thus the term "municipal source" may be too narrow to encompass                                     
all types of tap water sources.  Independent water purveyors and                                    
other community systems may operate similarly to municipal water                                    
sources, rely on the same types of water (e.g., surface water),                                     
use the same type of treatments of the water, and supply the                                        
water that flows from a tap.  They may differ from a municipal                                      
source only in that they are not affiliated with a municipality.                                    
     Thus, FDA agrees that water from water systems that are                                        
independent water purveyors, but that are not affiliated with                                       
specific municipalities, should bear labeling that makes clear                                      
its source.  Clearly, what would be considered a municipal source                                   
would be encompassed by the definition of a community water system because a source supplying an in
corporated city or town                                                                             
would regularly serve 25 or more people on a year-round basis (or                                   
have the minimum 15 year-round service connections).  The term                                      
"community water system" would encompass the independent water                                      
purveyors that the term "municipal source" would not.                                               
     Noncommunity water systems by definition would not serve a                                     
municipality.  FDA notes that some bottled water firms may meet                                     
the definition of a nontransient noncommunity system if they                                        
employ at least 25 persons and use the source water as the                                          
workplace water supply.  The intent of the labeling requirement                                     
was not to include these bottled water manufacturers.  Their                                        
water is considered a public water system only because they                                         
choose to use their own water source and not pipe water in from                                     
another source for their workplace water supply.                                                    
     Therefore, the agency concludes that bottled water from a                                      
community water system, as defined by EPA (40 CFR 141.2), must                                      
bear source labeling.  FDA finds that including all community                                       
water system sources in  165.110(a)(3)(ii) is the logical                                          
outgrowth of the January 5, 1993, proposal because the intent of                                    
the proposal, as explained above, was to cover all tap water.                                       
Thus, FDA is revising  165.110(a)(3)(ii) to apply to bottled                                       
water coming from a community water system as defined in 40 CFR                                     
141.2, rather than from a municipal source.  Alternatively,                                         
manufacturers may label their product as "from a municipal                                          
source" if appropriate.  (Moreover, as explained in comment 96 of                                   
this document, there may be some instances in which "from a                                         
public water supply" or "from a public water system" is                                             
appropriate.)                                                                                       
     73.  One comment disagreed with the provision that would                                       
exempt purified water from having to be labeled as from a                                           
municipal supply.  It stated that the process does not change the                                   
source.                                                                                             
     Although the agency acknowledges that purification does not                                    
change the source, FDA concludes that the exception for purified                                    
water is appropriate.  As FDA stated in the proposal (58 FR 393                                     
at 399), consumers purchase purified water because of its                                           
treatment and resultant purity rather than because of its source.                                   
In addition, because purified water and distilled water must meet                                   
the compositional requirements of the USP monograph for purified                                    
water, there are no significant compositional differences among                                     
purified and distilled waters, regardless of the source of the                                      
water.  Source information for purified waters is not a material                                    
fact because the water may be significantly different in                                            
composition than other water from that particular source.  Thus,                                    
the absence of source information for purified water is not                                         
misleading under section 403(a) of the act.  The comment did not                                    
present any information other than the basic argument summarized                                    
above.  Thus, FDA is not making any changes in response to this                                     
comment.  However, manufacturers may optionally include source                                      
information on the label of purified water.                                                         
     74.  Several comments stated that proposed                                                     
 165.110(a)(3)(ii) implies that if bottled water from a                                            
municipal source has been treated to meet the definition of                                         
"purified" or "distilled water," it may be exempt from the                                          
labeling declaration of "from a municipal source," whether or not                                   
the product is labeled as "purified water" or "distilled water."                                    
The comments stated that the circumstances in which the municipal                                   
source of the water need not be disclosed should be limited, as                                     
the agency apparently intended, to when the water is labeled as                                     
"purified" or "distilled."  To effect this limitation, the                                          
comments suggested that the agency add the words "and is labeled                                    
as such" to the regulation.                                                                         
     The agency agrees with the comments.  In the preamble to the                                   
proposal, the agency stated that the exemption would apply only                                     
to purified water or distilled water that was labeled as such (58                                   
FR 393 at 399).  However, FDA failed to include the statement                                       
"and is labeled as such" in the regulation.  Therefore, FDA is                                      
modifying  165.110(a)(3)(ii) to include this requirement.                                          
     In addition, because FDA has included the alternative terms                                    
"deionized water," "demineralized water," "purified drinking                                        
water," and "reverse osmosis water" in the definition of purified                                   
water, the agency is modifying  165.110(a)(3)(ii) to include all                                   
of the terms that may be used under  165.110(a)(2)(iv) in the                                      
exemption.                                                                                          
     75.  One comment requested that, if the source of bottled                                      
water labeled as "sterilized water" is a municipal source, the                                      
product be exempt from the labeling requirements in                                                 
 165.110(a)(3)(ii).                                                                                
     The agency agrees that use of the terms "sterile" or                                           
"sterilized" on the label of bottled water should exempt it from                                    
the requirements of  165.110(a)(3)(ii).  Sterile water has                                         
undergone a treatment to meet strict microbiological standards.                                     
Purified water is exempt from the requirements of                                                   
 165.110(a)(3)(ii) in part because the process of purification                                     
removes many substances that are typical of the source water, and                                   
also because there are no significant differences between                                           
purified waters even though the source waters may be very                                           
different.  Consumers may purchase purified water and sterile                                       
water because of the specific treatment and not the source of the                                   
water.  In addition, because sterile water must meet the                                            
microbiological requirements of the USP definition for "sterile,"                                   
there are no significant microbiological differences among                                          
sterile waters, regardless of the source of the water.  Source                                      
information for sterile waters is not a material fact because the                                   
water may be significantly different in microbiological content                                     
than water from that particular source.  Thus, the absence of                                       
source information for sterile water is not misleading under                                        
section 403(a) of the act.                                                                          
     Therefore, the agency is modifying  165.110(a)(3)(ii) to                                      
exempt sterile water and sterilized water that is from a                                            
community water system from the source labeling requirement.                                        
     76.  One comment stated that FDA overlooked source labeling                                    
of partially purified water from a municipal source that isprocessed to remove some chemicals but d
oes not meet the                                                                                    
requirements of purified water.                                                                     
     FDA disagrees with the comment and affirms that water from a                                   
community water system that is partially purified (i.e., it does                                    
not meet the definition of purified water) does not qualify for                                     
an exemption from the requirements of  165.110(a)(3)(ii).  As                                      
discussed above under comment 74 of this document, there are no                                     
significant compositional differences between purified and                                          
distilled waters, regardless of the source of the water.                                            
Partially purified water, however, effectively continues to                                         
resemble the source water.  Because partially purified water does                                   
not qualify for the exemption, it is covered by                                                     
 165.110(a)(3)(ii).  Therefore, if the water is partially                                          
processed, and is from a community water source, the label must                                     
declare the latter fact.                                                                            
     77.  One comment stated that it would be misleading if a                                       
country setting is shown on the label, including lakes or ponds,                                    
and the product is drinking water processed from municipal                                          
supplies via reverse osmosis systems.                                                               
     FDA agrees that the use of certain graphics on a label of                                      
bottled water may be misleading to consumers if the source of the                                   
water is different than the source depicted or implied.  For                                        
example, a country setting on a label may mislead consumers into                                    
believing that the product is spring water when it is not.                                          
Section 403(a) of the act specifically states that a food shall                                     
be deemed to be misbranded if its labeling is false or misleading                                   
in any particular.  If a product is from a community water                                          
system, the label must clearly disclose this fact except as                                         
provided in  165.110(a)(3)(ii).                                                                    
     78.  Several comments stated that FDA has not provided,                                        
except in  129.80(a), for the long-established industry practice                                   
of adding minerals to adjust the taste of water that has been                                       
previously treated to meet the definition of "distilled" or                                         
"purified water."  One comment stated that water that is purified                                   
to meet the definition for "purified water," and subsequently has                                   
minerals added back to it, should be exempt from the source                                         
labeling requirement in  165.110(a)(3)(ii) because it has a                                        
totally different composition than other water from the municipal                                   
source.  It stated that the labeling could indicate that the                                        
water was purified or distilled, and that minerals had been added                                   
for flavor.  Another comment stated that this approach would                                        
allow for flexibility in labeling while providing adequate                                          
information for the consumer.                                                                       
     FDA advises that water from a community water system that                                      
has been treated to meet the definition of "purified water" in                                      
 165.110(a)(2)(iv), and is labeled as "purified water" or one of                                   
its alternative names, is exempt from the labeling requirements                                     
of  165.110(a)(3)(ii).  Water with minerals added for taste is                                     
considered a multi-component food, and the labeling "from a                                         
municipal source" describes only the water ingredient.  Thus, if                                    
minerals are added to purified water for taste, and the label                                       
states that the product is "purified water (or any of its                                           
alternative names) with minerals added for taste," the product is                                   
exempt from  165.110(a)(3)(ii) because the water ingredient                                        
meets the criteria for the exemption.                                                               
     79.  Some comments agreed with the requirement in                                              
 165.110(a)(3)(ii) but stated that the name of the source, be it                                   
a municipal source, water authority, or any other public water                                      
system, should be specifically included on the label so that the                                    
consumer may obtain water quality test results, such as those                                       
maintained by the public water system or the relevant regulatory                                    
agency.  One comment stated that consumers may then compare water                                   
quality results of the bottler with those of the public water                                       
system selling the water to the bottler, and consumers could                                        
contact the municipal source and ascertain whether a bottler is                                     
using a municipal source that adds fluoride to its finished                                         
water.                                                                                              
     Other comments requested that all bottlers of water list on                                    
the label the source of the product contained in the bottle.                                        
Comments asked that, for full disclosure, bottled water labels                                      
include the name of manufacturer, address of source, and well                                       
number or spring's legal name, so that consumers will know                                          
specifically from where the water comes.  One comment noted that                                    
many States require the geographic source identity.  Another                                        
comment added that many companies are misrepresenting their                                         
products to the consumer by vague labeling.                                                         
     FDA does not object to the optional label declaration of                                       
more specific information concerning the water source because                                       
such information may be useful to some consumers.  However, the                                     
agency does not agree that it should require specific water                                         
source labeling, or that the lack of such labeling means that the                                   
label is misleading and vague.                                                                      
     Under section 201(n) of the act, the agency must consider                                      
whether the information is a material fact whose nondisclosure                                      
will render the labeling misleading.  Under this standard, it is                                    
difficult to see why the name of the specific source, be it a                                       
public water supply, spring, or well, would be a material fact.                                     
The agency requires that the product water supply for each                                          
bottled water plant be from a source that is inspected and                                          
approved by the government agency having jurisdiction                                               
( 129.3(a)).  The product water supply must be properly located,                                   
protected, and operated, and must be easily accessible, adequate,                                   
and of a safe, sanitary quality that is in conformance at all                                       
times with the applicable laws and regulations of the government                                    
agency having jurisdiction ( 129.35(a)(1)).  Thus, the specific                                    
name of the source is not material to ensure the safety of the                                      
product.                                                                                            
     In addition, the water must meet the requirements of the                                       
quality standard in  165.110(b) or be labeled as substandard.                                      
Thus, the identity of the specific source is not material to                                        
ensure the quality of the product.                                                                  
     Finally, in this final rule FDA is providing for the use of                                    
alternative names that generally describe the source of the water                                   
(e.g., artesian, spring, and well).  Thus, consumers can have                                       
confidence that bottled water labeled as being from a certain                                       
type of water source is from a source meeting an appropriate                                        
definition.                                                                                         
     Therefore, the agency concludes that the absence of                                            
information concerning the exact water source (e.g., specific                                       
municipal source, the well number, spring's legal name, address                                     
of the source) is not a material omission that would render the                                     
labeling misleading because bottled water must meet FDA's                                           
requirements which provide the consumer with assurances as to the                                   
safety, quality, and type of source.  While the agency recognizes                                   
that some States require the geographic source identity, FDA                                        
simply is not persuaded that the additional information is a                                        
material fact that must be disclosed.                                                               
     The brand name and the name of the manufacturer distinguish                                    
bottled waters as much as specific source labeling would.                                           
According to  101.5(a), the label of a food in packaged form                                       
must specify conspicuously the name and place of business of the                                    
manufacturer, packer, or distributor.  This labeling requirement                                    
provides consumers with the necessary information to contact the                                    
firm and obtain information (e.g., the name and location of the                                     
source, the well number, or the spring's legal name) that is not                                    
provided on the label if they are interested.  Therefore, FDA                                       
concludes that there is no basis on which to require that                                           
information concerning the specific source of bottled water                                         
appear on the label.                                                                                
                                                                                                    
3.  Water for Infant Use                                                                            
     The agency proposed to require notice on the principal                                         
display panel of bottled water products that are promoted for                                       
infant use that such products are not sterile (if such is in fact                                   
the case), and that they should be used as directed by a                                            
physician or by infant formula preparation instructions (58 FR                                      
393 at 400).                                                                                        
     80.  One comment stated that  165.110(a)(3)(iii) should                                       
read:  "When the label or labeling characterizes the bottled                                        
water in any manner * * * as for feeding infants, and the product                                   
is not commercially sterile, within the meaning of the term at 21                                   
CFR 113.3(e), the principal display panel shall bear                                                
conspicuously the phrase * * *."  The comment stated that a                                         
qualification of the phrase "not sterile" to "not commercially                                      
sterile" would clarify that, by use of the term "sterile," the                                      
agency does not intend to require that bottled water for infant                                     
food use meet the requirements of the USP monographs for sterile                                    
waters which are compendial pharmaceutical articles in                                              
themselves.  It stated that there is no safety concern that                                         
necessitates that bottled water for infant use meet a different                                     
standard than the standard applicable to hermetically sealed low-acid foods, and none has been artic
ulated by FDA in the proposal.                                                                      
     The agency agrees with the comment.  As discussed                                              
previously, unless the label or labeling of a product that is                                       
labeled for use in feeding infants implies that the product meets                                   
USP requirements, FDA will not require that the product meet                                        
those requirements for sterility because commercial sterility is                                    
adequate.  Canned infant formula is processed to be commercially                                    
sterile, as defined in  113.3(e), and the agency sees no reason                                    
to subject bottled water for infants to stricter requirements.                                      
Therefore, the agency is modifying  165.110(a)(3)(iii) to state                                    
that its provisions apply when the product is not commercially                                      
sterile under  113.3(e)(3)(i).                                                                     
     81.  A number of comments opposed the use of the phrase "not                                   
sterile, use as directed by physician or by labeling directions                                     
for use of infant formula" in  165.110(a)(3)(iii).  The comments                                   
stated that infants, and even adults, do not require sterile                                        
foods but need foods that are free of pathogens, and that many                                      
health care professionals do not recommend sterilizing infant                                       
formula.  Some comments submitted scientific publications to                                        
support their position that infants do not need sterile foods.                                      
They pointed out that infant medicines, oral preparations                                           
(vitamins), and breast milk are not sterile.                                                        
     Comments noted that it is difficult for parents to achieve                                     
and maintain sterility in infant preparations and stated that                                       
there is no difference between infant formulas prepared using a                                     
clean method and formulas prepared with sterile water.  They                                        
stated that boiling bottled water that is not sterile may not be                                    
preferable to using water as it comes from the bottle because                                       
potentially harmful trace elements from the container used to                                       
boil the water may be concentrated during boiling.  The comments                                    
maintained that, in some cases (e.g., areas not served by                                           
municipal supplies), bottled water may be a more reliable and                                       
superior source of water for infant use than other sources of                                       
water.                                                                                              
     Some comments held that the requirement for the use of the                                     
phrase "not sterile" on infant formula or bottled water labeling                                    
is outdated, inappropriate, and may be unnecessarily alarming to                                    
consumers.  They asserted that the phrase may have the unintended                                   
but harmful effect of giving a false sense of security to parents                                   
that would cause them, and perhaps cause the preparer of the                                        
infant formula, to ignore several important sources of bacterial                                    
risk.                                                                                               
     Comments stated that the recommendations calling for                                           
sterilization were made in the 1940's and 1950's, before the                                        
widespread practice of chlorination of municipal water supplies,                                    
and that bottled water products being marketed today go through a                                   
rigorous quality control program to eliminate pathogens.  They                                      
maintained that there already are adequate industry standards in                                    
place, and that the phrase "not sterile" is not necessary.                                          
     Some comments pointed out that all aqueous systems contain a                                   
normal, nonpathogenic microbial content, and that the absence of                                    
such a normal microbial content could in itself be indicative of                                    
the presence of a microbial antimetabolite in the water.                                            
Comments stated that a requirement for the label statement "not                                     
sterile" lacks technical merit and is contrary to FDA's position                                    
of not imposing plate count limitations on all food products.                                       
They stated that FDA provided no scientific rationale, hospital                                     
survey data, epidemiological health data, physician-use surveys,                                    
bottled water surveys, or any other reasonable, objective                                           
information to support this requirement.  The comments held that                                    
sterilization does not provide a level of safety assurance equal                                    
to the assurance provided by the conjunction of protecting the                                      
aquifer from all risks of contamination and compliance with                                         
current good manufacturing practices (CGMP's), as demonstrated by                                   
the absence of microorganisms that are indicators of                                                
contamination (fecal bacteria).                                                                     
     Other comments stated that requiring a statement that the                                      
water is not sterile would serve only to eliminate certain                                          
products from the bottled water market.  They held that it would                                    
be grossly misleading, unjustified, and discriminatory to the                                       
infant water industry.                                                                              
     Comments stated that the labeling recommended, but not                                         
required, by FDA for infant formula is to direct parents to                                         
consult with their physicians before using the product.  The                                        
comments stated that this labeling of infant formula is to ensure                                   
that the parents are using the proper type and amount of formula                                    
for their babies, not because there was or should be concern                                        
about the water source used to mix the product.  These comments                                     
recommended that FDA drop the requirement in  165.110(a)(3)(iii)                                   
entirely because such labeling gives medical advice to parents.                                     
As an alternative, comments suggested that labeling could state                                     
that "parents should consult their physician for infant use."                                       
     Conversely, several comments supported the proposal because:                                   
(1)  Infants are a high-risk group in terms of susceptibility to                                    
infections, (2)  consumers will interpret a label "water for                                        
infant use" as not requiring any preparation before use in infant                                   
formulas, and (3)  the disclosure required for bottled water                                        
marketed for use with infants or children is consistent with the                                    
objectives of FDA in promulgating these regulations.  One comment                                   
added that labeling that can mislead a consumer to use nonsterile                                   
water in the belief that it is sterile may cause needless illness                                   
and possibly deaths.                                                                                
     One comment stated that bottled water intended for the                                         
general population is used for a significant proportion of                                          
infants.  It suggested a side panel statement on all bottled                                        
water products such as:  "If using to prepare infant formula,                                       
follow the mixing instructions on the infant formula label."                                        
Another comment suggested that each label reference to use for                                      
infant formula preparation be accompanied by a statement                                            
referring the consumer to the side panel usage instructions.                                        
     However, another comment that supported the intent of the                                      
disclosure statement disagreed with the proposed labeling                                           
requirement for infant water.  It stated that the proposed                                          
requirement in  165.110(a)(3)(iii) is a backward approach to                                       
public health protection for infants.  The comment stated that                                      
bottled water promoted for infant use should be required to meet                                    
strict sterility requirements.                                                                      
     FDA has considered these comments and, based on its                                            
consideration, concludes that labeling is necessary to inform                                       
consumers that bottled water labeled for infant use may not be                                      
sterile.                                                                                            
     The agency generally agrees with the conclusions of the                                        
scientific publications that the commenters submitted.  Although                                    
the conclusions of the articles demonstrated that infants                                           
generally do not need to consume a sterile product, one                                             
publication noted that "it is safer to feed an infant an almost                                     
sterile formula, than to feed him a formula with an unknown                                         
amount of contamination" (Ref. 18).  Use of appropriate                                             
ingredients and procedures in the preparation of infant formula                                     
is key in providing a suitable product for infant consumption.                                      
     One study, concerning the inoculation of the digestive                                         
tracts of axenic mice with the autochthonous bacteria of mineral                                    
water, was conducted on 6-week old mice and found that the                                          
autochthonous bacteria present in the mineral water from Vittel                                     
"Grande Source" were not able to establish themselves (i.e., to                                     
multiply and subsist in a great number) in the digestive tracts                                     
of axenic mice (Ref. 19).  However, FDA questions whether these                                     
results apply to human infants because 6-week old mice are past                                     
an infant stage.  In addition, only one source of water was used                                    
in the study, and the results cannot be extrapolated to water                                       
from other sources.                                                                                 
     The agency agrees with the comments that stated that nursing                                   
infants do not consume a sterile product, and that infants do not                                   
necessarily need to consume sterile products.  However, although                                    
the heterotrophic bacteria present in water may not be harmful to                                   
the general population, high levels of some microorganisms,                                         
particularly opportunistic pathogens, may cause illness in some                                     
infants (Ref. 20).  Parents need to be informed that bottled                                        
water labeled for infant use is not sterile because, without this                                   
statement, they may be led to believe that water labeled for                                        
infant use is sterile, and that its sterility is the                                                
characteristic that makes it appropriate for infant use.  Thus,                                     
the agency concludes that bottled water intended for infant use                                     
should be at least commercially sterile or be labeled to inform                                     
consumers that it is not.                                                                           
     There are essentially two situations in which an infant may                                    
consume infant water:  (1)  When it is used to reconstitute                                         
powdered infant formula or dilute concentrated liquid formula;                                      
and (2)  when it is not used as an ingredient of the infant                                         
formula but is otherwise fed to infants, especially when used                                       
directly for feeding infants.  If infant water was used only in                                     
the first situation, the labeling statement on infant water to                                      
"use as directed on the infant formula labeling" would be                                           
sufficient (and indeed, the additional statement "use as directed                                   
by a physician" would be redundant, since this statement is also                                    
required on the formula label).  Concerns of sterility are                                          
adequately addressed on the infant formula label because under                                      
 107.20 (21 CFR 107.20), the product label must bear                                               
instructions for sterilization of water, bottles, and nipples                                       
when necessary for preparing infant formula for use.  However,                                      
the second situation does not involve other appropriate labeling                                    
information.  The second situation represents circumstances in                                      
which it would be appropriate to seek physician oversight, not                                      
only because of a potential concern about sterility, but also                                       
because of the concern about excessive feeding of water (and risk                                   
of hyponatremia) to infants.                                                                        
     FDA agrees that once a package has been opened, it is                                          
subject to contamination.  The process of preparing infant                                          
formula may also introduce other sources of contamination.  The                                     
contamination of these foods from environmental sources and                                         
during preparation may not be harmful to most infants.  However,                                    
parents must be aware of the fact that bottled infant water is                                      
not sterile, so that they may take special precautions if needed.                                   
Parents may be purchasing bottled infant water rather than using                                    
other sources of water including tap water and other types of                                       
bottled water specifically because they assume that the infant                                      
water is sterile.                                                                                   
     The agency is not advocating that parents boil bottled water                                   
that is not sterile and that is intended for infants.  However,                                     
parents need to use infant water as directed by their physicians                                    
or by the labeling for infant formula.  The agency stated in the                                    
final rule concerning labeling requirements for infant formula                                      
that "potable," "sterile," or "pure drinking water" must be used                                    
in preparing infant formula (50 FR 1833 at 1836, January 14,                                        
1985).  As stated previously in the response to this comment,                                       
under  107.20(a)(3), infant formula labels must bear directions                                    
for sterilization of water, bottles, and nipples when necessary                                     
for preparing infant formula for use.  In addition,  107.20(b)                                     
requires that a pictogram appear on the label depicting the major                                   
steps for preparation of that infant formula.  One of the steps                                     
in the example provided in the regulation includes an                                               
accompanying statement that sterilization is recommended, and                                       
that the infant's physician will decide if it is not required.                                      
     Thus, while it is true that recommendations for                                                
sterilization of water for infant use were made before the                                          
widespread practice of chlorination of municipal water supplies,                                    
FDA's regulations provide that sterilization should occur unless                                    
the physician decides otherwise.  Parents need to consult with                                      
the infant's physician to determine whether sterilization is not                                    
necessary.  The labeling requirement on bottled water is                                            
necessary to inform parents that the water is not sterile.  Thus,                                   
if the physician says that sterilization of the infant's water is                                   
necessary, the parents will know that it is necessary to take                                       
appropriate steps to provide the infant with sterile water.                                         
     FDA agrees that bottled water ordinarily contains a normal                                     
microbial content unless treated.  As some comments pointed out,                                    
the reason for the absence of microorganisms in bottled water may                                   
be from the presence of an antimetabolite (i.e., an antimicrobial                                   
agent) in the water.  The bottled water standards allow for the                                     
optional addition of safe and suitable antimicrobial agents, and                                    
the lack of microorganisms may be the result of the addition or                                     
use of these agents.  As defined in  130.3(d), "safe and                                           
suitable" means that the ingredient performs an appropriate                                         
function in the food, is used at a level no higher than necessary                                   
to achieve its intended purpose, and is used in conformity with                                     
established regulations.  Bottled water containing a substance,                                     
such as an antimetabolite, at a level considered injurious to                                       
health is deemed to be adulterated under section 402(a) of the                                      
act.                                                                                                
     FDA disagrees that all bottled water labels need a side                                        
panel statement concerning infant use.  Under section 201(n) of                                     
the act, in conjunction with section 701(a) of the act, the                                         
agency is authorized to require labeling if the information is a                                    
material fact with respect to consequences that may result from                                     
the usual and customary use of the article.  Because most bottled                                   
water is not consumed by infants, however, and thus, infant use                                     
is not the usual or customary use of bottled water, in the                                          
absence of other relevant statements in the labeling, only a                                        
mandatory statement on bottled water for infant use is necessary                                    
to disclose a material fact under section 201(n) of the act.                                        
Therefore, the agency concludes that the comment has not provided                                   
sufficient grounds to require that all bottled water bear this                                      
statement.                                                                                          
     In regards to the comments stating that the labeling                                           
requirement is misleading, unjustified, and discriminatory to the                                   
infant water industry, the agency has found that this information                                   
is a material fact on infant water under section 201(n) of the                                      
act because the product is targeted for an infant subpopulation                                     
that has unique needs.  Manufacturers are labeling their products                                   
with a special claim, and thus the agency is establishing a                                         
special requirement, the disclosure of a fact that is material in                                   
light of the claim, for the use of this claim.                                                      
     Finally, the agency does not agree that all bottled water                                      
intended for use by infants should be sterile.  As already                                          
discussed under this comment, infants do not always require                                         
sterile products.  Thus, it is not necessary to require that                                        
bottled infant water be sterile.                                                                    
     Therefore, for the reasons discussed above, FDA concludes                                      
that the label statement, "Not sterile.  Use as directed by                                         
physician or by labeling directions for use of infant formula" is                                   
appropriate for bottled water that is labeled for use in feeding                                    
infants if the product is not commercially sterile.                                                 
     82.  Three comments stated that the agency should consider                                     
limiting the sodium levels of infant waters to levels lower than                                    
those authorized for adults.  They suggested limiting sodium                                        
levels to a maximum of 25 mg/L.                                                                     
     FDA disagrees with these comments.  Sodium is an important                                     
nutrient for infants, and the agency has determined that it would                                   
not be prudent to take a regulatory approach that could cause                                       
bottlers to eliminate the sodium from their infant water                                            
products.  However, FDA acknowledges that there is concern that,                                    
if sodium is consumed at high levels, infants may develop a taste                                   
for it that can have consequences later in life.  The agency's                                      
infant formula regulations, in  107.100(a) (21 CFR 107.100(a)),                                    
specify that for each 100 kilocalories of formula in the form                                       
prepared for consumption as directed on the container, the                                          
formula contain at least 20 mg, and not more than 60 mg, of                                         
sodium.                                                                                             
     Bottled water is generally not a significant source of                                         
sodium.  Data on the sodium content of the U.S. water supplies                                      
were reviewed and discussed in the April 18, 1984, final rule on                                    
the declaration of sodium content (49 FR 15510 at 15524).  The                                      
data revealed that 50 percent of the water sources contain less                                     
than 3.0 mg sodium per 6 fluid ounces (oz), and that 95 percent                                     
contain less than 17.7 mg sodium per 6 fluid oz.  Higher sodium                                     
levels, up to 52.9 mg per 6 fluid oz, occur in only 5 percent of                                    
the water sources.                                                                                  
     Any bottled water, including bottled infant water,                                             
containing more than an insignificant amount of sodium (5 mg or                                     
more per 240 mL serving) must bear nutrition labeling that lists                                    
the number of mg of sodium per serving.  The comment's                                              
recommended maximum level of 25 mg/L sodium is equivalent to 6 mg                                   
per 240 mL serving.  Thus, any bottled water at or above the                                        
comment's recommended level will, in fact, be required to bear                                      
nutrition labeling.                                                                                 
     Therefore, the agency concludes that no maximum level for                                      
sodium is warranted for bottled water labeled for infants because                                   
sodium is an important nutrient for infants, and bottled water                                      
generally does not contain more than an insignificant amount of                                     
sodium.  Parents concerned about the amount of sodium in bottled                                    
water labeled for infant use will be alerted to the presence of                                     
more than an insignificant amount of sodium through nutrition                                       
labeling.                                                                                           
     83.  Three comments stated that the agency should consider                                     
limiting the nitrate levels of infant waters to levels lower than                                   
those authorized for adults.  They suggested limiting nitrate                                       
levels to a maximum of 15 mg/L when expressed as nitrate (NO3-)                                     
(3.4 mg/L when expressed as nitrogen (N)).  The comments stated                                     
that infants are particularly at risk from ingestion of large                                       
amounts of nitrates which, at high doses, can result in cases of                                    
methemoglobinemia (blue baby syndrome).                                                             
     In the FEDERAL REGISTER of December 1, 1994 (59 FR 61529)                                      
(hereinafter referred to as the December 1994 final rule), FDA                                      
established maximum levels of 10.0 ppm for nitrate (as N), 1 mg/L                                   
for nitrite (as N), and 10 mg/L (as N) for total nitrate and                                        
nitrite in bottled water ( 165.110(b)(4)(iii)(A)).  Bottled                                        
water exceeding these levels must be labeled as substandard under                                   
 165.110(c)(3).  FDA's maximum levels are based on maximum                                         
contaminant level goals (MCLG's) established by EPA in the                                          
FEDERAL REGISTER of January 30, 1991 (56 FR 3526).  EPA based the                                   
MCLG's on the toxicity of nitrate in humans from the reduction of                                   
nitrate to nitrite in the human body.  By reacting with                                             
hemoglobin, nitrite forms methemoglobin, which will not transport                                   
oxygen to the tissues and thus can lead to asphyxia (i.e., blue                                     
babies).  If sufficiently severe, asphyxia can lead to death.                                       
Concern for adverse effects of nitrate and nitrite are primarily                                    
for infants and other special populations.                                                          
     Therefore, because the toxicity of nitrate and nitrite in                                      
infants and other special populations was considered in                                             
establishing EPA's MCLG's, the agency concludes that there is no                                    
basis to establish a separate level for bottled water intended                                      
for infant use.                                                                                     
4.  Method of Preparation of Purified Water                                                         
     FDA did not propose to require that the method of                                              
preparation of purified water be stated on the label, although it                                   
stated that a manufacturer may include this information on the                                      
label if it desires.  FDA requested comments from interested                                        
persons on the need to include this information on the label.                                       
     84.  One comment stated that the specific purification                                         
process should be identified on the label because the public has                                    
a right to know what specific treatment the water receives.                                         
     FDA disagrees with the comment.  Although the information                                      
may be useful for some consumers, the agency tentatively                                            
concluded in the proposal that there was no substantive basis on                                    
which to require that this information appear on the label.                                         
Under section 201(n) of the act, the agency must determine, among                                   
other factors, whether the information is a material fact with                                      
respect to consequences that may result from use of the article,                                    
or in light of other representations made in the labeling, to require that information appear on th
e label.  As discussed                                                                              
previously, purified water is defined compositionally, and there                                    
are no significant compositional differences among purified                                         
waters prepared through the different methods.  Therefore, FDA                                      
finds that the comment has not provided an appropriate basis to                                     
justify a requirement that the specific purification process                                        
appear on the label, and it is not requiring that the method of                                     
preparation be stated on the label of purified water.  However, a                                   
manufacturer may include this information on the label if it so                                     
desires.                                                                                            
5.  Other Labeling                                                                                  
     85.  One comment asked that FDA reconsider IBWA's requested                                    
provision that any bottler whose corporate name, brand name, or                                     
trademark contains the words "spring," "well," "artesian,"                                          
"mineral," or any other derivation should be required to label                                      
each bottle with the type of bottled product in typeface at least                                   
equal to the size of the typeface of the corporate name, brand                                      
name, or trademark if the type of bottled water differs from that                                   
implied in the corporate name, brand name, or trademark.  It                                        
stated that this requirement may eliminate some of the                                              
misconceptions consumers have about bottled water products on                                       
which the term "spring water" appears as part of the corporate                                      
name.                                                                                               
     Another comment expressed concern about labels that use                                        
trade names or registered and unregistered trademarks on water                                      
that imply a geographic origin that is different from the actual                                    
source of the water.                                                                                
     The agency agrees that the use of certain corporate names,                                     
brand names, and trademarks may be misleading to consumers if the                                   
source of the water is different from the source stated or                                          
implied.  Section 403(a) of the act specifically states that a                                      
food shall be deemed to be misbranded if its labeling is false or                                   
misleading in any particular.  Thus, the use of terms or                                            
vignettes that state or imply that the source of the water is                                       
different than the actual source would misbrand the food.  In                                       
addition, section 403(f) of the act states that a food is                                           
misbranded if any word, statement, or other information required                                    
by or under authority of the act to appear on the label or                                          
labeling is not prominently placed thereon with such                                                
conspicuousness (as compared with other words, statements,                                          
designs, or devices in the labeling) and in such terms as to                                        
render it likely to be read and understood by the ordinary                                          
individual under customary conditions of purchase and use.  Thus,                                   
if required labeling describing the water is not appropriately                                      
conspicuous in relation to other label representations, the                                         
product is misbranded.  Therefore, the agency concludes that it                                     
already has the authority to charge misbranding under the act in                                    
the situations discussed by the comments, and that a specific                                       
regulation is not necessary.  With the establishment of the                                         
standard of identity in  165.110(a), FDA now has particular                                        
definitions of bottled water sources that will assist the agency                                    
in enforcing these misbranding provisions of the act.                                               
     86.  One comment stated that water can support the growth of                                   
bacteria, and that opening the bottle and pouring out the water                                     
exposes the remaining water to air and can constitute an                                            
"inoculation" with environmental bacteria.  It stated that few                                      
consumers are aware that water is a suitable growth medium for                                      
bacteria, and that FDA may consider the advisability of a storage                                   
statement, such as "refrigerate after opening," in the usage                                        
instructions for bottled water.                                                                     
     The agency does not agree that such labeling is necessary,                                     
although it would not object to manufacturers voluntarily                                           
including a statement such as "refrigerate after opening" on the                                    
label.  The agency has established a microbiological quality                                        
standard in  165.110(b)(2).  In the FEDERAL REGISTER of October                                    
6, 1993 (58 FR 52042), FDA proposed to amend the microbiological                                    
quality provision to require that bottled water be free of                                          
coliform bacteria.  The agency expects to issue a final rule in                                     
that proceeding soon.  Also in the October 6, 1993 proposal, FDA                                    
requested comments on other matters concerning the                                                  
microbiological quality of bottled water.  The agency will                                          
address these issues as appropriate.                                                                
     FDA acknowledges that some bacteria can grow in bottled                                        
water, and that bottled water, unless treated in some manner, is                                    
not sterile.  Innocuous bacteria are generally already present                                      
before the consumer's first use.  Additional bacteria may enter a                                   
bottle of water with exposure to the air.  However, the growth of                                   
bacteria is limited in bottled water because it is not a good                                       
source of nutrients for most microorganisms.                                                        
     Therefore, the agency is not convinced that a statement such                                   
as "refrigerate after opening" is necessary on bottled water                                        
because water is not a good growth medium for microorganisms, and                                   
because the agency has already addressed microbiological                                            
standards in its quality standard.                                                                  
                    III.  STANDARD OF QUALITY                                                       
     FDA proposed to move the definition for bottled water from                                     
 103.35(a)(1) to  165.110(a)(1) and the standard of quality for                                   
bottled water from  103.35 to  165.110.  The agency also                                          
proposed to include existing definitions for "lot," "sample," and                                   
"analytical unit" found in  103.3 in part 165.  Because FDA was                                    
proposing to remove the quality standard from  103.35 and                                          
include it in  165.110, FDA tentatively concluded that the                                         
definition of these terms should be moved as well.                                                  
     87.  One comment objected to a provision in  165.3(b) that                                    
states that "a sample consists of 10 subsamples (consumer units)"                                   
because this amount of testing is too costly.  It stated that a                                     
better procedure would be to analyze at least one sample for                                        
coliforms and heterotrophic plate count for each size of                                            
container and each type of product from one lot.                                                    
     This comment falls outside the scope of this rulemaking.                                       
The agency did not propose to amend the current definitions but                                     
only to move these definitions to be in proximity with the                                          
bottled water standard in part 165.  Therefore, FDA is not                                          
modifying the general definitions at this time.  However, persons                                   
interested in an amendment of the definitions for "lot,"                                            
"sample," and "analytical unit" may petition the agency,                                            
providing recommended definitions and justification for the                                         
recommendations.                                                                                    
                 A.  Exemptions for Mineral Water                                                   
     The agency tentatively concluded in the January 1993,                                          
proposal that certain aesthetically based allowable levels should                                   
not apply to waters with more than 500 ppm TDS.  Accordingly, the                                   
agency proposed to add a footnote to the list of allowable levels                                   
in  165.110(b)(4)(i)(A) to provide that when water is labeled as                                   
"mineral water," it will be exempt from the allowable levels for                                    
color, odor, TDS, chloride, iron, manganese, sulfate, and zinc.                                     
However, FDA did not propose to include bottled waters that are                                     
not conspicuously identified with the term "mineral" or that are                                    
identified as "mineral water, low mineral content" in this                                          
exemption because consumers will not generally expect to                                            
encounter flavors affected by high mineral content in these                                         
bottled water products.  In addition, the agency did not propose                                    
to exempt mineral water from the allowable levels for copper,                                       
fluoride, silver, and turbidity.  The agency requested comment                                      
concerning the need to establish a separate turbidity level for                                     
mineral water.                                                                                      
     The agency stated in the January 1993, proposal that, if it                                    
established an allowable level for aluminum, it would propose to                                    
exempt mineral water (except low-mineral-content type mineral                                       
waters) from that standard because the standard is intended to                                      
control the aesthetic properties of the water (turbidity) and not                                   
its effect on the body.  In the December 1994 final rule, the                                       
agency established an allowable level of 0.2 mg/L for aluminum in                                   
bottled water.  In a proposal published elsewhere in this issue                                     
of the FEDERAL REGISTER, the agency is proposing to exempt                                          
mineral water from the allowable level for aluminum.                                                
     88.  Three comments stated that mineral water should be                                        
subject to all of the same regulations (including the TDS maximum                                   
allowable level) as bottled water with no exceptions.  However,                                     
the comments provided nothing to support this position.                                             
     The agency disagrees with these comments.  For the most                                        
part, mineral water is subject to the same requirements as                                          
bottled water.  FDA is only exempting mineral water that contains                                   
more than 500 ppm TDS from the maximum level requirements for                                       
chloride, iron, manganese, sulfate, zinc, and total dissolved                                       
solids in  165.110(b)(4) (see footnote 1 to                                                        
 165.110(b)(4)(i)(A)).  The agency established these maximum                                       
levels based on aesthetic factors and not health or safety                                          
factors (27 FR 2152, March 6, 1962).  Most mineral waters exceed                                    
the quality requirement of 500 mg/L for total dissolved solids                                      
because they contain higher levels of these minerals than other                                     
types of bottled water.  The comments have not provided any basis                                   
for modifying the exemption for mineral water, only the general request that the agency do so.  Giv
en the nature of mineral                                                                            
water, and the fact that the exemption it is granting only has                                      
aesthetic significance, FDA finds no reason to make a change in                                     
 165.110(b)(4) in response to these comments.                                                      
     89.  Several comments supported the proposed exemption from                                    
secondary aesthetic-based maximum limits in the case of mineral                                     
water.  However, they urged the agency not to limit the exemption                                   
only to mineral waters containing more than 500 mg/L.  They                                         
requested that all mineral waters, regardless of their TDS                                          
content, be exempt from the secondary aesthetic-based maximum                                       
limits.  The comments stated that given that there is no consumer                                   
safety concern for these secondary maximum levels, there is no                                      
reason to limit the exemption to mineral waters with a TDS above                                    
500 mg/L.  One comment noted that a mineral water with 490 ppm                                      
TDS, 0.4 mg/L iron, and 0.08 mg/L manganese and a mineral water                                     
with the same iron and manganese content but with 510 ppm TDS                                       
would be identical from an analytical perspective, but one would                                    
be substandard, and the other would not.                                                            
     In the January 1993 proposal (58 FR 393 at 401), FDA stated                                    
that it did not include bottled waters that are not conspicuously                                   
identified with the term "mineral," or that are identified as                                       
"mineral water, low mineral content," in the exemption because                                      
consumers will not generally expect to encounter flavors affected                                   
by high mineral content in these bottled water products.                                            
     The agency agrees that there are no consumer safety concerns                                   
for these secondary maximum levels.  The exemption from the                                         
quality standard for mineral water is based on allowable levels                                     
that were established for aesthetic reasons and not for consumer                                    
safety.  The allowable levels from which mineral water is                                           
exempted are color and odor (physical quality) and chloride,                                        
iron, manganese, sulfate, total dissolved solids, and zinc                                          
(chemical quality).  Water containing less than 500 ppm TDS will                                    
not exceed the allowable levels for chloride, sulfate, or total                                     
dissolved solids because of the high allowable levels in the                                        
standard.  In addition, it is unlikely that water containing less                                   
than 500 ppm TDS would exceed the allowable levels from which                                       
mineral water is exempted.                                                                          
     The agency must consider whether consumers would expect                                        
products labeled as "mineral water, low mineral content" to                                         
contain objectionable aesthetic characteristics.  Clearly,                                          
consumer expectations exist that products labeled as "mineral                                       
water" may contain unique aesthetic characteristics (Ref. 21).                                      
Because products containing less than 500 ppm TDS are labeled as                                    
"mineral water," FDA finds that consumers will be informed that                                     
the product may contain objectionable aesthetic characteristics.                                    
Therefore, FDA concludes that the exception should also apply to                                    
"mineral water, low mineral content."  FDA is modifying the                                         
footnote to  165.110(b)(3) and  165.110(b)(4)(i)(A) to include                                    
all mineral water, including that containing less than 500 ppm                                      
TDS.                                                                                                
     90.  Some comments stated that it might be appropriate for                                     
the agency to clarify in the text of the regulation that the                                        
standards for which an exemption is provided for mineral water                                      
are aesthetically based and do not relate to a health concern.                                      
     FDA agrees that the exemptions from the allowable levels in                                    
the standard are for those that are based on EPA secondary                                          
maximum contaminant levels (SMCL's), which were established for                                     
aesthetic reasons and not for health or safety reasons, although                                    
the agency is not exempting mineral water from all of the                                           
allowable levels based on EPA's SMCL's.  FDA finds that the                                         
requested modification in the footnote of the regulation would                                      
clarify the intent of the exemption.  Therefore, the agency is                                      
modifying the footnote to  165.110(b) to state that the                                            
exemptions are aesthetically based allowable levels and do not                                      
relate to a health concern.                                                                         
     91.  Some comments urged the agency to exert caution                                           
concerning certain harmless, naturally occurring minerals that                                      
the agency characterizes as possibly causing negative aesthetic                                     
effects.  They urged the agency to consider the rate of                                             
consumption by consumers of mineral waters containing these                                         
compounds before making any final decision.                                                         
     The agency assures the commenters that, as it considers how                                    
EPA's SMCL's should apply to bottled water and to mineral water                                     
in particular, FDA has evaluated, and will continue to evaluate,                                    
whether the aesthetic effect of the substance will be of concern                                    
to consumers.  This evaluation includes a consideration of the                                      
rate of consumption of mineral water.  The agency is exempting                                      
mineral water from some but not all allowable levels that are                                       
based on EPA's SMCL's.  As FDA explained in response to the                                         
previous comment, FDA has formulated the quality standards to                                       
protect consumers from any adverse effects on the body, even                                        
those that may be characterized as aesthetic.                                                       
     92.  One comment recommended that FDA reexamine the                                            
allowable levels for fluoride in the case of carbonated mineral                                     
water packaged in bottle sizes of 1.5 L or less because consumers                                   
will not use products packaged in these types of containers as a                                    
tap water alternative, and there will be a much lower average                                       
daily intake of these products.  The comment stated that it would                                   
promote fairness towards existing mineral water bottlers by                                         
setting standards in a manner that is the same as that used for                                     
other food products.  It suggested that the maximum allowable                                       
concentration of fluoride be no greater than 3.0 ppm for                                            
carbonated mineral waters, where the TDS is between 500 and 1000                                    
ppm, and up to 6.0 ppm where the TDS is above 1000 ppm.                                             
     Another comment recommended that FDA set the fluoride limit                                    
for bottled waters at 2 ppm.  The comment said that this limit is                                   
a feasible one for mineral water producers to meet.  As an                                          
alternative, based on the theory that children rarely consume                                       
much of the high-mineral waters that are likely to have a high                                      
fluoride level, the comment suggested that FDA permit a fluoride                                    
content of more than 2 ppm in mineral waters, provided that the                                     
label bear this prominent warning:  "Not recommended for use by                                     
children; fluoride content can contribute to a significant risk                                     
of dental mottling."                                                                                
     FDA disagrees that mineral water should be exempt from the                                     
maximum levels for fluoride for bottled water.  Although mineral                                    
water may not be consumed in as great a quantity as other types                                     
of water, consumers may obtain fluoride from other sources, and                                     
thus, mineral water can contribute to excessive total consumption                                   
of this mineral.                                                                                    
     The agency notes that the quality standard sets forth                                          
maximum levels for fluoride.  FDA proposed a revised allowable                                      
level for fluoride of 2.0 ppm for naturally occurring fluoride in                                   
bottled water (53 FR 36063 at 36067, September 16, 1988).  The                                      
agency will be proceeding with that rulemaking now that EPA has                                     
published a notice of intent not to revise its fluoride drinking                                    
water standards (58 FR 68826, December 29, 1993).  The label of                                     
bottled water, including mineral water, containing fluoride at                                      
levels greater than the maximum allowable levels of fluoride in                                     
 165.110(b)(4)(ii) must bear the statement "contains excessive                                     
fluoride" in accordance with  165.110(c)(3).                                                       
     93.  One comment stated that, if in the final rule FDA                                         
allows an exemption for sulfate in mineral water containing more                                    
than 500 ppm TDS, FDA should require that all bottled water                                         
containing sulfates display labels with language similar to the                                     
following:  "Warning, this product may contain high levels of                                       
sulfate which may cause diarrhea in sensitive population groups                                     
including infants, children, and pregnant women."  It stated that                                   
this statement should be a minimum requirement because there is                                     
evidence that sensitive population groups are susceptible to                                        
harmful effects from products that contain sulfates.                                                
     The agency notes that in the FEDERAL REGISTER of December                                      
20, 1994 (59 FR 65578), EPA proposed a MCLG and a National                                          
Primary Drinking Water Regulation (NPDWR) including a MCL of 500                                    
ppm TDS for sulfate.  EPA stated that sulfate is a unique                                           
contaminant because the health effect associated with the                                           
ingestion of relatively high levels of sulfate in drinking water                                    
(i.e., ranging from loose stools to diarrhea) is acute and                                          
temporary and is expected to last approximately 2 weeks.  In                                        
addition, EPA stated that the health risk only applies to persons                                   
not already acclimated to high sulfate-containing water--infants,                                   
travelers, and new residents.  EPA did not propose to amend the                                     
SMCL of 250 mg/L for sulfate that is based on aesthetic effects                                     
(i.e., taste and odor).                                                                             
     In the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) concerning the                                        
control of drinking water, EPA and FDA agreed that the authority                                    
to control substances in drinking water should be vested with EPA                                   
to avoid duplicative and inconsistent regulation.  Therefore, FDA                                   
is not establishing a maximum allowable level for sulfate in                                        
mineral water at this time.  However, if EPA establishes an MCL                                     
for sulfate in public drinking water, in accordance with section                                    
410 of the act (21 U.S.C. 349), FDA will consider amending the                                      
bottled water quality standard to establish a maximum allowable                                     
level for sulfate in mineral water.                                                                 
     The agency is exempting mineral water from the allowable                                       
level for sulfate of 250 ppm at this time because some mineral                                      
waters exceed this aesthetically determined level without causing                                   
any adverse effects (Ref. 22).  However, if mineral water                                           
contains sulfate, or any other substance, at a level that is                                        
injurious to health, it is deemed to be adulterated and subject                                     
to regulatory action.                                                                               
     94.  One comment stated that under the January 1993                                            
proposal, bacteriologically and chemically pure artesian or                                         
mineral water, for example, that is safe for consumers would have                                   
to bear the label statement "abnormal color and smell," even if                                     
the "abnormal" color and smell results from perfectly normal,                                       
naturally occurring dyes and gasses that are constituent to its                                     
source.  The comment contended that these substances make the                                       
water unique by their individual combination and are often sought                                   
or favored by consumers, both domestically and internationally.                                     
It stated that the designation "abnormal" on unadulterated,                                         
uncontaminated water is an inappropriate requirement for                                            
labeling.  It stated that it is especially inappropriate when the                                   
source waters are unique, identified as to their source, and                                        
otherwise pure, natural, and uncontaminated.                                                        
     FDA established the physical quality standards concerning                                      
color and odor based on EPA SMCL's.  These allowable levels were                                    
established for aesthetic reasons and not to ensure consumer                                        
safety.  The primary purpose of a quality standard is to                                            
establish the minimum acceptable quality criteria for a product                                     
when it is offered to consumers.  The quality standard for                                          
bottled water is based on the normal range of waters, and a                                         
consumer's expectation is also based on the normal range of                                         
waters.  Thus, the label needs to respond to that expectation and                                   
not be tailored to individual situations.  Because bottled water                                    
that does not meet the color and odor quality standard may be                                       
objectionable to consumers, the labeling requirements established                                   
in the standard continue to be appropriate for bottled water in                                     
general.                                                                                            
     Therefore, bottled water (e.g., artesian water) that is not                                    
exempted from the quality standard and that exceeds the maximum                                     
allowable levels for color or odor must bear the label statements                                   
"Abnormal Color" or "Abnormal Odor" as required by                                                  
 165.110(c)(2).  However, the agency points out that in the case                                   
of mineral water, products that do not meet the color and odor                                      
quality standard are exempted from the standard.                                                    
            B.  Substandard Chemical Quality Labeling                                               
     In the January 1993 proposal, FDA tentatively concluded that                                   
the general phrase, "Contains Excessive Chemical Substances," may                                   
not be adequate for mineral water and proposed that the label or                                    
labeling of mineral water list the specific names of any                                            
substances present in amounts that exceed the allowable levels to                                   
which mineral water is subject (e.g., "Contains Excessive                                           
Fluoride," "Contains Excessive Trihalomethanes").                                                   
     95.  Two comments objected to allowing bottlers to                                             
distribute a product that does not meet the water quality                                           
standards.  One comment stated that the purpose of water quality                                    
standards is to prevent products that are below acceptable                                          
standards from being distributed to consumers.  It noted that                                       
given the emphasis by the bottled water industry on the quality                                     
of bottled water versus tap water, it is quite doubtful that                                        
bottlers would print any substandard notice on the product label.                                   
Another comment questioned whether consumers would be able to                                       
interpret the significance of the phrase "contains excessive                                        
chemical substances" on a label.  It requested that FDA require                                     
at a minimum that the specific chemical substances be listed                                        
similar to FDA's proposal for substandard mineral water.                                            
     One comment questioned whether bottled water exceeding the                                     
microbiological standards should be sold at all, regardless of                                      
how it is labeled.                                                                                  
     FDA notes that under section 403(h)(1) of the act, a food is                                   
deemed to be misbranded if it is a food for which a standard of                                     
quality has been prescribed by regulation, and its quality falls                                    
below such standard, unless its label bears, in such manner and                                     
form as such regulations specify, a statement that it falls below                                   
such standard.  Bottled water may be sold even though it contains                                   
a substance at a level that exceeds the maximum allowable levels                                    
in the quality standard so long as that substance does not                                          
adulterate the food under section 402 of the act.  However, the                                     
agency points out that most of the maximum allowable levels in                                      
the bottled water quality standard are identical to EPA MCL's,                                      
and EPA establishes its levels based on health considerations.                                      
Therefore, many substances, including microorganisms (e.g.,                                         
coliforms), present in amounts exceeding FDA's maximum allowable                                    
levels could be present at levels that are injurious to health.                                     
     The agency disagrees with the request that it require, at a                                    
minimum, that the specific chemical substances that exceed the                                      
maximum allowable levels in  165.110(b)(4) to be listed on the                                     
label instead of providing the exception in  165.110(c)(3) if                                      
the bottled water is not mineral water.  The chemical content of                                    
mineral waters generally exceeds one or more allowable levels in                                    
the bottled water standard, and thus, consumers would expect                                        
mineral water to normally contain excessive chemicals.  As                                          
discussed above, the agency has exempted mineral water from                                         
certain allowable levels in the quality standard on this basis.                                     
Consumers would not expect bottled water that is not mineral                                        
water to contain any excessive chemicals because the quality                                        
standard is based on the normal range of waters.                                                    
     Therefore, the agency concludes that the statement "contains                                   
excess chemical substances" is appropriate for bottled water                                        
other than mineral water, and that it is not necessary to require                                   
more specific labeling because consumers will be alerted to the                                     
presence of chemical substances in amounts that exceed the                                          
maximum allowable levels.  However, the agency does not object to                                   
the labeling of bottled water that declares the substandard                                         
presence of specific chemicals in lieu of the more general                                          
statement "contains excess chemical substances."                                                    
     FDA notes that it has made a number of editorial                                               
modifications in  165.110(c), including deleting and renumbering                                   
several of the provisions that appeared in the proposal, for                                        
clarity.                                                                                            
            IV.  CURRENT GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES                                               
  A.  Product Water, Operations Water, and Compliance Procedures                                    
     On January 5, 1993, the agency proposed to update the                                          
references in  129.35 and to delete the exclusion for mineral                                      
water from testing requirements in  129.80(g).  FDA also                                           
proposed to permit firms that use a municipal water system as the                                   
source of their water to substitute municipal testing results                                       
showing full compliance with the EPA primary and secondary                                          
drinking water regulations (or a certificate to this effect) for                                    
the source water chemical contaminant testing required in                                           
 129.35(a)(3).  In addition, the agency proposed to permit firms                                   
that use a nonmunicipal water source as the source of their water                                   
to reduce the frequency of testing and the number of chemical                                       
contaminants for which they test source water if they can                                           
document that such reduction is consistent with a waiver that the                                   
State has issued under EPA regulations ( 129.35(a)(4)(ii)).                                        
     96.  Several comments suggested that FDA use the term                                          
"public water supply" as defined by EPA rather than use the term                                    
"municipal supply."  (See previous discussion in comment 72.)                                       
     The agency notes that it used the term "municipal water                                        
system" in proposed source water testing exemptions in                                              
 129.35(a)(4) (58 FR 393 at 407).  However, FDA agrees that in                                     
the context of this section, the term "public water system" is                                      
more appropriate because it includes water that is covered by                                       
EPA's drinking water regulations and State programs established                                     
under EPA programs.  The intent of FDA's testing exemptions was                                     
to apply to water based on whether or not the source was a public                                   
water system.  Therefore, the agency is modifying                                                   
 129.35(a)(4)(i) to include firms that use a public water system                                   
for source water and  129.35(a)(4)(ii) to include firms that do                                    
not use a public water system.                                                                      
     97.  One comment requested that all types of nonmunicipal                                      
sources maintain documentation on file that establishes that the                                    
source has been evaluated and determined to meet the design,                                        
operation, and maintenance requirements of the government agency                                    
having jurisdiction.                                                                                
     The agency advises that firms must have source approval of                                     
their product water and must maintain records of the source                                         
approval.  According to  129.3(a), an "approved source," when                                      
used in reference to a plant's product water or operations water,                                   
means a source of water and the water therefrom, whether it be                                      
from a spring, artesian well, drilled well, municipal water                                         
supply, or any other source, that has been inspected, and the                                       
water sampled, analyzed, and found to be of a safe and sanitary                                     
quality, according to the applicable laws and regulations of the                                    
State and local government agencies having jurisdiction.  The                                       
presence in the plant of current certificates or notifications of                                   
approval from the government agency or agencies having                                              
jurisdiction constitutes approval of the source and the water                                       
supply.  Therefore, no action is necessary in response to the                                       
comment.                                                                                            
     98.  Comments stated that no standards are set to protect a                                    
well or spring and its recharge area against the intrusion of                                       
contaminants.  One comment stated that there should be very                                         
strict rules governing ownership, control, and protection of the                                    
recharge area of any well or spring.                                                                
     FDA agrees that the recharge area of any well or spring is a                                   
critical area.  However, the agency disagrees that it is                                            
necessary to establish requirements concerning ownership,                                           
control, and protection of the recharge area of any well or                                         
spring because it has already established requirements in parts                                     
129 and 165 to guard against the presence of contaminants in                                        
bottled water, whether from the recharge area or any other source                                   
of contamination.                                                                                   
     First of all, the source of the water must be an approved                                      
source, and the water found to be of a safe and sanitary quality                                    
by the government agency approving the source ( 129.35(a)).                                        
Such source approval could include the source of recharge to                                        
determine whether the water will be of a safe and sanitary                                          
quality.                                                                                            
     In addition to meeting the requirements of part 129, bottled                                   
water must meet the requirements of the quality standard in                                         
 165.110(b) or be labeled as substandard in accordance with                                        
 165.110(c).  The quality standard lists allowable levels for                                      
many common contaminants of recharge areas (e.g., pesticides and                                    
nitrates).                                                                                          
     Finally, as stated in  165.110(d), bottled water containing                                   
a substance at a level considered injurious to health under                                         
section 402(a)(1) of the act is deemed to be adulterated,                                           
regardless of whether or not the water bears a label statement of                                   
substandard quality.  Therefore, the agency concludes that                                          
consumers are protected against problems that may occur in the                                      
recharge area of a spring or well used as a source for any                                          
bottled water product.                                                                              
     99.  One comment stated that any water under the influence                                     
of surface water must be treated as surface water and should                                        
never be called "spring water," "well water," or "natural water,"                                   
regardless of whether it was collected from a spring or pumped                                      
from a well.                                                                                        
     Another comment stated that, in general, the microbiological                                   
standards in the proposed regulation are weak and do not address                                    
the issue of ground water under the influence of surface water.                                     
The comment urged FDA to incorporate appropriate source approval                                    
standards similar to those of the State of North Carolina as a                                      
means to ensure safe bottled spring and well waters.                                                
     One comment requested that FDA state that spring water must                                    
not be under the direct influence of surface water.  The comment                                    
stated that a requirement, such as an initial water particulate                                     
test during the rainy season, should be considered for spring                                       
water.                                                                                              
     The agency agrees that any water under the direct influence                                    
of surface water is not ground water, regardless of whether it                                      
was collected from a spring or pumped from a well.  EPA defines                                     
"ground water under the direct influence of surface water" in 40                                    
CFR 141.2 as any water beneath the surface of the ground with                                       
significant occurrence of insects or other macroorganisms, algae,                                   
or large diameter pathogens such as Giardia lamblia, or                                             
significant and relatively rapid shifts in water characteristics                                    
such as turbidity, temperature, conductivity, or pH which closely                                   
correlates to climatological or surface water conditions.  The                                      
manifestation of any of these factors evidences that the source                                     
is under the direct influence of surface water and is, therefore,                                   
not a ground water source.  The definitions of "spring water,"                                      
"artesian water," "mineral water," and "well water" that FDA is                                     
adopting in this document require that the source be a ground                                       
water source.                                                                                       
     EPA has published a Consensus Method for Determining                                           
Groundwaters Under the Direct Influence of Surface Water Using                                      
Microscopic Particulate Analysis (MPA) (Ref. 23).  The consensus                                    
method is the result of a collaborative effort combining the                                        
experiences and knowledge of contributors from around the country                                   
into an acceptable consensus method.  This guidance may be used                                     
to determine whether ground water is under the direct influence                                     
of surface water.  This determination may be considered as part                                     
of the source approval conducted by the State or local agency                                       
having jurisdiction because, under  129.3(a), source water must                                    
be found to be of a safe and sanitary quality.                                                      
     FDA adds that it published a proposal, to amend the quality                                    
standard for bottled water to require that bottled water be free                                    
of coliform bacteria (58 FR 52042).  In that proposed rule, FDA                                     
also addressed other matters concerning the microbiological                                         
quality of bottled water and requested comments on whether the                                      
agency should establish quality standard regulations for other                                      
microorganisms that may be present in bottled water and pose a                                      
health hazard.  The agency will discuss the comments that it                                        
received in response to that proposal in that rulemaking.                                           
     100.  One comment recommended added testing for                                                
bacteriological contaminants, trihalomethanes, lead, and copper                                     
in those situations where the bottled water manufacturers will be                                   
permitted to substitute municipal test results for the testing                                      
requirements of  129.35(a)(3).  It stated that additional                                          
testing is necessary for these contaminants because of                                              
contamination that could occur in the water distribution system.                                    
     One comment stated that allowing bottled water producers                                       
that use a municipal water source to substitute municipal testing                                   
results for the source testing requirements is reasonable only if                                   
the final product testing requirements are retained.                                                
     FDA disagrees that it should require additional testing by                                     
bottled water manufacturers who substitute public water system                                      
test results for source water testing.  However, the agency                                         
agrees with the comment that stated that the substitution of                                        
public water system test results for source water testing is                                        
appropriate only if the final product is tested according to the                                    
requirements in  129.80(g).  The testing exemptions for                                            
microbiological contaminants that FDA established previously                                        
( 129.35(a)(3)(i)) and for chemical contaminants that FDA is                                       
establishing in this rulemaking ( 129.35(a)(4)(i)) apply to the                                    
source water testing requirement only.  Part 129 also requires                                      
testing of product water (i.e., after processing but prior to                                       
packaging) and finished product.  Under  129.80(a), product                                        
water samples must be taken after processing and before bottling                                    
by the plant and analyzed as often as is necessary to ensure                                        
uniformity and the effectiveness of the processes performed by                                      
the plant.  In addition, under  129.80(g)(1) and (g)(2), a                                         
bottled water plant must analyze a representative sample of the                                     
finished product of each type of bottled drinking water at least                                    
once a week for the presence of bacteria and at least annually                                      
for chemical contaminants.                                                                          
     The agency concludes that no additional chemical or                                            
microbiological testing requirements are necessary for bottled                                      
water manufacturers who use public water systems and who                                            
substitute testing results from the public water system for                                         
source water testing requirements in part 129 because FDA                                           
requires that product water and finished product water be                                           
regularly tested, and if any contaminant is contributed by the                                      
water distribution system it will be detected by the required                                       
testing.  The testing requirements in  129.80 have functioned                                      
satisfactorily since FDA adopted them in 1979 (44 FR 12173,                                         
March 6, 1979), and the agency finds no reason to amend them.                                       
FDA points out that its adoption of the source water testing                                        
exemptions in  129.35(a)(4) in no way changes how product water                                    
and finished product water are to be tested.                                                        
     101.  Two comments objected to  129.35(a)(4)(ii) regarding                                    
a waiver for nonmunicipal water used by firms for the purposes of                                   
manufacturing bottled water.  They stated that under proposed                                       
 129.35(a)(4)(ii), a firm could reduce the number of                                               
contaminants for which it tests, and the frequency with which it                                    
performs testing, if it can document that such reduction is                                         
consistent with a waiver that the State has issued under EPA                                        
regulations.  The comments stated that FDA should not allow a                                       
manufacturer to establish that such a waiver exists but should                                      
require the governmental entity regulating the source to make                                       
such a determination.                                                                               
     The agency disagrees with the comments.  Firms may reduce                                      
the frequency of testing and the number of chemical contaminants                                    
for which they test source water if they can document that such                                     
reduction is consistent with a State-issued waiver under EPA                                        
regulations for public water systems.  State waivers may either                                     
eliminate the requirement for a 3-year compliance period (e.g.,                                     
pesticides/polychlorinated biphenyl's (PCB's)) or reduce the                                        
frequency of testing (e.g., inorganics and volatile organic                                         
chemicals).  Waivers are either based on a review of established                                    
criteria ("a waiver by rule") or on a vulnerability assessment.                                     
In the FEDERAL REGISTER of January 30, 1991 (56 FR 3526 at 3562),                                   
EPA discussed the criteria for waivers by "rule" and                                                
"vulnerability assessment."                                                                         
     EPA may rescind waivers issued by a State where EPA                                            
determines that the State has issued a significant number of                                        
inappropriate waivers.  If a waiver is rescinded, the firm must                                     
monitor in accordance with the requirements in  129.35.                                            
     States develop their own specific vulnerability assessment                                     
procedures that use the general guidelines established by EPA.                                      
If a State chooses not to develop these procedures, firms cannot                                    
receive waivers and must monitor the source water in accordance                                     
with  129.35.                                                                                      
     Therefore, firms cannot decrease the amount of testing that                                    
they perform unless the State has issued a waiver to them.  The                                     
presence of a current State-issued document in the plant will                                       
certify that testing of source water may be reduced.  The                                           
reduction in testing is only for those contaminants covered by                                      
the waiver.  If the State has not issued such a waiver, the firm                                    
must annually test for all contaminants.                                                            
     FDA points out that the State-issued waiver from chemical                                      
testing requirements in  129.35(a)(4) applies only to source                                       
water testing, and that the product water must be tested in                                         
accordance with  129.80(a).  Moreover, the finished product must                                   
be tested for all substances in accordance with  129.80(g).                                        
Thus, FDA concludes that no modification of  129.35(a)(4)(ii) is                                   
warranted.                                                                                          
     102.  One comment recommended that  129.35(a)(4)(ii) be                                       
modified to require that at least two complete samples for all                                      
contaminants be made before any reduction in testing is allowed,                                    
even when the State has issued a waiver.  It stated that there                                      
can be great variation in contaminant levels in both surface and                                    
ground water sources, even with withdrawal points that are in                                       
close proximity.  The comment claimed that a requirement for                                        
initial sampling is the only way to ensure that waivers are                                         
appropriate, and that, where firms make use of this testing                                         
exception, they should be required to maintain the data from                                        
initial sampling and support documentation on State waivers                                         
indefinitely rather than for the 2-year period typically required                                   
for test data.                                                                                      
     The agency disagrees with the comment.  As EPA explained in                                    
the FEDERAL REGISTER of January 30, 1991 (56 FR 3526 at 3562),                                      
waivers are granted on a contaminant-by-contaminant basis.                                          
Waivers for pesticides/PCB's and volatile organic chemicals                                         
(VOC's) may be granted after the firm conducts a vulnerability                                      
assessment, and the State determines that the source is not                                         
vulnerable based on that assessment.  A waiver must be renewed                                      
every 3 years (id.).  Waivers for inorganic contaminants (except                                    
nitrate/nitrite) may be granted for up to 9 years.  If a firm                                       
does not receive a waiver, it must comply with the requirements                                     
in  129.35.                                                                                        
     The vulnerability assessment is based on a two-step waiver                                     
procedure.  Step 1 determines whether the contaminant was used,                                     
manufactured, stored, transported, or disposed of in the area.                                      
In the case of some contaminants, an assessment of the                                              
contaminant's use in the treatment or distribution of water may                                     
also be required.  "Area" is defined as the watershed area for a                                    
surface water system or the zone of influence for a ground water                                    
system and includes effects in the distribution system.  If the                                     
State determines that the contaminant was not used, manufactured,                                   
stored, transported, or disposed of in the area, then the system                                    
may obtain a "use" waiver.  Systems receiving a "use" waiver are                                    
not required to continue on to Step 2 to determine                                                  
susceptibility.  EPA anticipated that most "use" waivers will be                                    
for pesticides/PCB's, the use of which can be determined more                                       
easily than for VOC's.  Obtaining a use waiver for the VOC's will                                   
be limited because VOC's are ubiquitous in the United States (56                                    
FR 3526 at 3562).                                                                                   
     If a use waiver cannot be given, that is, if the State                                         
cannot make a determination that the contaminant was not used,                                      
manufactured, stored, transported, or disposed of in the area, a                                    
system may conduct an assessment to determine susceptibility                                        
(Step 2).  Susceptibility considers prior occurrence or                                             
vulnerability assessment results, environmental persistence and                                     
transport of the chemical, the extent of source protection, and                                     
EPA Wellhead Protection Program reports.  Systems with no known                                     
"susceptibility" to contamination based upon an assessment of the                                   
above criteria may be granted a waiver by the State.  If                                            
"susceptibility" cannot be determined, a system is not eligible                                     
for a waiver (56 FR 3526 at 3563).                                                                  
     EPA also established guidelines for decreased monitoring of                                    
inorganic chemicals (56 FR 3526 at 3564).  States may decide,                                       
based on prior analytical results, variation in analytical                                          
results, and system changes such as pumping rates or stream                                         
flows/characteristics, to allow firms to reduce the monitoring                                      
frequency to no less than 9 years.  To qualify for this waiver,                                     
at a minimum, three previous compliance samples must have been                                      
reliably and consistently less than the MCL.                                                        
     The above minimum guidelines, along with any additional                                        
State requirements, provide adequate consumer protection because                                    
a firm must perform appropriate testing before a waiver will be                                     
issued.  In addition, the use or susceptibility requirements of                                     
the program provide assurances that a contaminant is not present                                    
in the area.  Finally, the waiver does not extend to testing of                                     
the product water and the finished product.  Thus, FDA concludes                                    
that the requirements for obtaining the waiver adequately address                                   
consumer safety concerns.                                                                           
     Firms must document that they have a current State-issued                                      
waiver, and that the waiver complies with State requirements even                                   
though the waiver may have been issued prior to the 2-year record                                   
retention time period required by  129.80(h).  Records of the                                      
waiver must be retained for not less than 2 years after the                                         
waiver expires to meet the requirements of  129.80(h).  This                                       
retention requirement ensures that all testing records,                                             
exemptions from testing, and source approval requirements are                                       
documented for the same production batch of bottled water.                                          
However, the agency sees no need for manufacturers to maintain                                      
these records indefinitely, and the comment has not provided                                        
grounds for such a requirement.                                                                     
     103.  One comment asked whether FDA is requiring the same                                      
sampling frequency as is required for public systems under EPA's                                    
Phase II rules (56 FR 3526) by including the waiver process in                                      
this regulation.  The comment stated that, for example,                                             
inorganics could be tested at a frequency of once every 9 years                                     
according to EPA regulations.  It asked whether FDA feels that                                      
such a frequency of testing provides adequate protection of                                         
source water.                                                                                       
     The agency notes that manufacturers must comply with all the                                   
source testing requirements in  129.35(a)(3) unless they have                                      
received a State-issued waiver for specific contaminants.  As                                       
discussed above, under EPA's Phase II rules (56 FR 3526), States                                    
may issue waivers only if circumstances affecting the source and                                    
the area surrounding the source make it unlikely that the                                           
contaminant will be present.  Based on its review of the evidence                                   
on these factors, the State may issue a waiver decreasing the                                       
frequency of testing from 3 to 9 years depending on the                                             
contaminant.                                                                                        
     FDA believes that the use of a State-issued waiver is an                                       
appropriate substitute for source water testing because a State                                     
must require that the water be tested before issuing the waiver,                                    
and that the conditions relevant to the occurrence of the                                           
contaminant confirm that it is unlikely that the contaminant will                                   
be present.  Again, FDA affirms that the finished bottled water                                     
must be tested at least annually for chemical contaminants and                                      
comply with FDA regulations.                                                                        
     104.  One comment stated that, because the source has no                                       
bearing on the final product for purified or distilled water,                                       
there was reason to question whether it was necessary for a                                         
bottler that bottles only purified water to have annual chemical                                    
and radiological tests of its source water.                                                         
     FDA disagrees with the comment.  Source testing is important                                   
to ensure the purity of the source water.  The source water must                                    
be of reasonable quality to ensure that the finished product                                        
complies with the quality requirements.  If a source contains                                       
excessively high levels of some contaminants, these contaminants                                    
may not be adequately removed in the purification process.                                          
Therefore, the agency concludes that the source water for                                           
purified water should not be exempt from all the requirements of                                    
part 129.  However, the agency notes that there are source water                                    
testing exemptions in  129.35(a)(4) that may apply to the source                                   
water for purified water.  If applicable, these exemptions could                                    
replace or reduce the source testing requirements for chemical                                      
contaminants.                                                                                       
     105.  One comment expressed concern about FDA regulating the                                   
testing of source water if FDA would preempt State agencies from                                    
setting standards for source water that are equivalent to State                                     
Drinking Water Standards.  The comment held that the State should                                   
have the authority to set more stringent standards for source                                       
water when there is a safety issue.  It noted that water bottled                                    
in a State should have at least the same health-based quality                                       
standards as public drinking water in that State.  The comment                                      
questioned whether FDA has jurisdiction over source water and was                                   
opposed to FDA regulating the water quality standards for source                                    
water, which are under the jurisdiction of the States or EPA.                                       
     The agency notes that it is not amending its regulations                                       
with respect to the testing of source water except to provide                                       
that bottlers using a public water supply may substitute                                            
certificates showing compliance with EPA's requirements for                                         
chemical contaminants for testing results, and that bottlers may                                    
use a State-issued waiver for some chemical contaminants.                                           
Section 129.35(a)(3) specifies the frequency of testing of source                                   
water for chemical, radiological, and microbiological                                               
contaminants.  This sampling is in addition to any that is                                          
performed by government agencies having jurisdiction.  The source                                   
is approved by the State or local government agency having                                          
jurisdiction and must comply with the applicable laws of that                                       
agency, even though those laws are more stringent than FDA                                          
requirements.  FDA has traditionally relied on the laws of the                                      
State or locality having jurisdiction.  Therefore, FDA concludes                                    
that there is no basis for the concern expressed by the comment.                                    
                                                     B.  Additional Definitions                    
     Although the agency did not propose definitions for "bottled                                   
water plant," "plant operator," or "water dealer," or to revise                                     
the definition for "bottled drinking water," as IBWA requested,                                     
FDA requested comment from interested persons on the need to                                        
define or amend the definitions of these terms.                                                     
     106.  One comment recommended that FDA define "bottled water                                   
plant."  It stated that such a definition would enable States                                       
that have bottled water regulations to adopt a uniform                                              
definition.                                                                                         
     The agency has decided that it is not necessary to adopt a                                     
definition for "bottled water plant."  Part 110, concerning CGMP                                    
in manufacturing, packing, and holding human food, applies to                                       
bottled water along with part 129.  Under  110.3(k), "plant"                                       
means the building or facility or parts thereof, used for or in                                     
connection with the manufacturing, packaging, labeling, or                                          
holding of human food.  Thus, "bottled water plant" can be fairly                                   
interpreted, under FDA's regulations, to mean the building or                                       
facility or parts thereof, used for or in connection with the                                       
manufacturing, packaging, labeling, or holding of bottled water.                                    
In its petition, IBWA defined "bottled water plant" as any place                                    
or establishment in which bottled water is prepared for sale.                                       
The State of California defines "water-bottling plant" as any                                       
facility in which bottled water is produced (Ref. 2).  Thus, FDA                                    
concludes that the definition in  110.3(k) is adequate because                                     
it is consistent with the common definition of a bottled water                                      
plant, and that a specific definition for this term in part 129                                     
is not necessary.                                                                                   
                   C.  Unregulated Contaminants                                                     
     IBWA requested revision of part 129 to provide for                                             
additional source and final product testing requirements in                                         
 129.35 to detect and control specific unregulated contaminants.                                   
The agency did not propose to require such testing because firms                                    
are free to test for contaminants not listed in the quality                                         
standard, and they must employ appropriate quality control                                          
procedures to ensure that food is suitable for human consumption                                    
( 110.80).  In addition, bottled water that contains a poisonous                                   
or deleterious substance is subject to regulatory action under                                      
the adulteration provisions of the act.  Producers that knowingly                                   
produce and distribute adulterated bottled water may be subject                                     
to the criminal penalties of the act.                                                               
     107.  One comment requested that FDA amend  129.35 to                                         
require testing of bottled water products (on at least an annual                                    
basis) for those substances listed in EPA's requirements for                                        
monitoring of unregulated contaminants.  It stated that this                                        
requirement should be made immediately applicable to all bottled                                    
water producers.                                                                                    
     The agency disagrees with the comment.  Under section                                          
1445(a) of the SDWA, EPA was required to promulgate monitoring                                      
requirements for unregulated contaminants.  EPA established                                         
monitoring requirements for 51 synthetic organic chemicals in the                                   
FEDERAL REGISTER of July 8, 1987 (52 FR 25690), and promulgated monitoring requirements for an addit
ional 30 synthetic organic                                                                          
chemicals and inorganic chemicals in the FEDERAL REGISTER of                                        
January 30, 1991 (56 FR 3526), that were not regulated by NPDWR's                                   
to assist EPA in establishing future NPDWR's.  EPA did not                                          
establish regulations that would set forth maximum levels of                                        
these contaminants, only the requirement that public water                                          
systems monitor for them.                                                                           
     FDA does not believe that it is necessary to mandate testing                                   
for unregulated contaminants in bottled water because such                                          
testing is for EPA monitoring and information purposes only.  As                                    
EPA identifies the need to regulate a substance from its                                            
monitoring activities, and subsequently adopts MCL's for them,                                      
FDA will promulgate applicable regulations for bottled water                                        
under section 410 of the act (21 U.S.C. 349).  The comment did                                      
not provide a basis to establish a requirement for additional                                       
testing.  It only requested that FDA do so.  Therefore, the                                         
agency concludes that amending  129.35 in the manner suggested                                     
by the comment is not warranted.                                                                    
     108.  One comment stated that additional final product                                         
testing should be required for any contaminants that can enter                                      
the water through the water system or through the bottles.  It                                      
stated that these contaminants, given their low levels, may not                                     
be poisonous or immediately deleterious but should not be in                                        
bottled water.  The comment stated that several years ago, a                                        
California firm used a new clear resin that was subsequently                                        
found to be leaching cyclohexanes, among other things.  It stated                                   
that at least one consumer injury was reported when a particularly bad batch of resin was used.  The
 comment cited                                                                                      
another instance of chemicals entering the water from improperly                                    
cured new piping.  It stated that in these instances, the                                           
required source water monitoring for additional contaminants                                        
would not have uncovered the problem in the finished product.                                       
     FDA disagrees that it should establish additional finished                                     
product testing requirements for chemical contaminants derived                                      
from processing equipment or packaging.  Substances that get into                                   
the product from product contact surfaces can vary from                                             
manufacturer to manufacturer and from lot to lot.  The agency                                       
considers these substances to be indirect food additives.  Thus,                                    
any product that contains such a substance whose use has not been                                   
regulated by FDA will be deemed to be adulterated under section                                     
402(a)(2)(C) of the act (21 U.S.C. 342(a)(2)(C)) in that it                                         
contains an unsafe food additive.                                                                   
     Under  129.40(a), all plant equipment and utensils must be                                    
suitable for their intended use.  Included under the coverage of                                    
this section are all collection and storage tanks, piping,                                          
fittings, connections, bottle washers, fillers, cappers, and                                        
other equipment that may be used to store, handle, process,                                         
package, or transport product water.  All product water contact                                     
surfaces must be constructed of nontoxic and nonabsorbent                                           
material that can be adequately cleaned and sanitized and that is                                   
in compliance with section 409 of the act (21 U.S.C. 348).                                          
Furthermore,  129.80(f) requires that only nontoxic containers                                     
and closures be used.  "Nontoxic materials" is defined in                                           
 129.3(e) as materials for product water contact surfaces, used                                    
in the transporting, processing, storing, and packaging of                                          
bottled drinking water, that are free of substances that may                                        
render the water injurious to health or that may adversely affect                                   
the flavor, color, odor, or bacteriological quality of the water.                                   
Therefore, the agency concludes that there are already adequate                                     
provisions in part 129 to address the comment's concern, and that                                   
no modifications are necessary.                                                                     
              D.  Microbiological Control Standards                                                 
     IBWA requested revision of  129.40 to include                                                 
microbiological control standards that included prohibitions from                                   
processing and bottling water with equipment that has been used                                     
to produce milk, fruit juice, or any other food product likely to                                   
contribute nutrients for microbiological growth.  FDA was not                                       
persuaded by the information that IBWA submitted that the                                           
revision was needed.                                                                                
     109.  A number of comments stated that FDA did not provide a                                   
sufficient rationale for not requiring that firms use dedicated                                     
equipment (i.e., equipment used solely for one product) for                                         
processing bottled water.  One comment stated that dedicated                                        
equipment, with the exception of fillers, is an important                                           
precaution to maintain the quality of bottled water.                                                
     One comment stated that FDA should prohibit equipment used                                     
for milk production from being also used for bottled water                                          
production to protect consumers from potential health hazards.                                      
It stated that there is a greater potential of microbiological                                      
contamination of bottled water if it is produced using equipment                                    
that is also used for milk production.  Another comment stated                                      
that high coliform and other bacteria counts from either                                            
inadequate cleaning or inadequately trained personnel improperly                                    
maintaining or operating the equipment has been a problem with at                                   
least one California dairy that also bottles water.                                                 
     Several comments were concerned that FDA proposed no                                           
restriction on the use by water bottlers of:  (1)  Equipment used                                   
to transport, store, process, or bottle nonfood products (e.g.,                                     
pesticides, toxic chemicals); and (2)  equipment used to                                            
transport, store, process, or bottle food products likely to                                        
contaminate bottled water with nutrients for microbial growth.                                      
The comments stated that these equipment use restrictions are                                       
important public health safeguards.                                                                 
     Conversely, other comments supported FDA's position that                                       
dedicated lines for bottled water should not be a requirement.                                      
The comments noted that only good sanitation will ensure a low                                      
probability of microbiological contamination.  One comment stated                                   
that the rationale used by the agency is supportable based on the                                   
performance history of the dairies and soft drink manufacturers                                     
that also produce bottled water.                                                                    
     One comment stated that certified results confirmed that                                       
bottled water produced by dairy plants equalled or exceeded the                                     
bacterial quality of that produced by dedicated water bottlers.                                     
It stated that all bottlers should be subject to the same quality                                   
and testing regulations.                                                                            
     One comment from a dairy stated that a requirement for                                         
dedicated equipment would eliminate that dairy from the bottled                                     
water market.  The comment stated that, because the firm is                                         
experienced in high quality sanitation practices from bottling                                      
fluid milk products, it is confident of its ability to meet                                         
regulatory product standards for consumer safety.                                                   
     One comment stated that, although milk, fruit juice, and                                       
other food processing operations should not be prohibited from                                      
processing bottled water, additional operational requirements                                       
should be imposed on these types of processing plants because of                                    
the likelihood of mineral deposits building up inside feed lines.                                   
The comment stated that these mineral deposits tend to shield                                       
bacteria and other pathogens from disinfection if standard                                          
disinfection practices are used.                                                                    
     FDA disagrees with the comments that stated that it should                                     
require dedicated equipment for processing bottled water.  Under                                    
 129.37(a), the product water-contact surfaces of all                                              
multiservice containers, utensils, pipes, and equipment used in                                     
the transportation, processing, handling, and storage of product                                    
water must be clean and adequately sanitized.  All product water-contact surfaces must be inspected 
by plant personnel as often as                                                                      
necessary to maintain the sanitary condition of such surfaces and                                   
to ensure that they are free of scale, oxidation, and other                                         
residues.  The presence of any unsanitary condition, scale,                                         
residue, or oxidation must be immediately remedied by adequate                                      
cleaning and sanitizing of that product water-contact surface                                       
before it is used again.                                                                            
     Section 129.40(a)(2) requires that all product water contact                                   
surfaces be constructed of nontoxic and nonabsorbent material                                       
that can be adequately cleaned and sanitized and that is in                                         
compliance with section 409 of the act.  Furthermore,  129.80(d)                                   
states that sanitizing operations must be adequate to effect                                        
sanitization of the intended product water-contact surfaces and                                     
any other critical area.  Therefore, the agency concludes that                                      
there already are appropriate regulations in part 129 that                                          
adequately address the concerns of the comments.                                                    
     As FDA stated in the proposal (58 FR 393 at 403), dedicated                                    
equipment will not ensure that the goal of production of foods                                      
with a low probability of microbiological contamination will be                                     
met.  Only good sanitation will ensure that this goal is                                            
achieved.  FDA does not require dedicated equipment for any other                                   
food and is not persuaded that dedicated equipment is necessary                                     
for bottled water.  Bottled water containing any substance                                          
considered injurious to health is adulterated under section                                         
402(a)(1) of the act.                                                                               
     Microbiological standards exist for bottled water in                                           
 165.110(b)(2).  Manufacturers must ensure that bottled water                                      
meets the microbiological quality standards in  165.110(b)(2) or                                   
label the product as substandard.  If the product is deemed to be                                   
adulterated, it cannot be sold at all.                                                              
     In the FEDERAL REGISTER of October 6, 1993 (58 FR 52042),                                      
the agency proposed to amend the quality standard to require that                                   
bottled water be free of coliform bacteria.  In addition, FDA                                       
addressed other matters concerning the microbiological quality of                                   
bottled water and requested comments on whether it should                                           
establish quality standard regulations for other microorganisms                                     
that may be present in bottled water and may pose a health risk.                                    
The agency intends to discuss the comments that it received in                                      
response to that proposal in that rulemaking.                                                       
                    E.  Processes and Controls                                                      
     IBWA requested revision of certain requirements in part 129                                    
pertaining to filtration and germicidal treatment.  FDA did not                                     
propose the requested revisions but stated that it would consider                                   
adopting them in other rulemakings.  As stated above, the agency                                    
has proposed to amend the quality standard for bottled water to                                     
require that bottled water be free of coliform bacteria (58 FR                                      
52042).  In that proposal, FDA also addressed other matters                                         
concerning the microbiological quality of bottled water and                                         
requested comments on whether the agency should establish quality                                   
standard regulations for other microorganisms that may be present                                   
in bottled water and may pose a health risk.  The agency will                                       
discuss the comments that it received in response to that                                           
proposal in that rulemaking.                                                                        
     110.  Several comments urged FDA to require mandatory                                          
disinfection of bottled water with ozone or an equivalent                                           
disinfection process.  Two comments stated that failure to                                          
require treatment of mineral water with ozone or an equivalent                                      
disinfectant process would reduce the level of public health                                        
protection now provided.                                                                            
     However, some comments stated that bottled water need not be                                   
disinfected if it meets the standards of the European Economic                                      
Community Directive 80/777/EEC for Natural Mineral Water, July                                      
15, 1980 (European Community), which mandates that numerous and                                     
frequent microbiological analyses of the water be done to ensure                                    
its potability in lieu of disinfection.  One comment stated that                                    
mandatory disinfection of mineral water that includes bottled                                       
water products covered by the ERCS for "natural mineral waters"                                     
would constitute interstate commerce restraints and inappropriate                                   
regulations.                                                                                        
     The agency does not consider it necessary at this time to                                      
require disinfection of bottled water.  FDA acknowledges the                                        
strict standards for bottling water that have been adopted by the                                   
European Community and by other countries, and that, when water                                     
from protected sources is bottled under strict hygienic                                             
conditions, disinfection may not be necessary.  However, the                                        
agency has established microbiological quality standards in                                         
 165.110(b)(2), and bottled water that does not comply with the                                    
microbiological quality standard must be labeled with a statement                                   
of substandard quality, in accordance with  165.110(c)(1).  In                                     
addition, any bottled water containing a substance at a level                                       
considered injurious to health is deemed to be adulterated                                          
regardless of whether or not the label bears a statement of                                         
substandard quality.  FDA has authority to take regulatory action                                   
against such product under section 402(a)(1) of the act.                                            
     Under the SDWA, EPA monitors drinking water and establishes                                    
regulations to protect the public from the adverse health effects                                   
of contaminants in public drinking water.  FDA's microbiological                                    
standard, like other bottled water standards, follows EPA's                                         
requirements for drinking water.  Thus, even though the                                             
microbiological standard was established for quality purposes and                                   
not safety, FDA concludes that it is adequate to protect the                                        
public health.  The agency points out that should EPA require                                       
disinfection of drinking water, FDA will consider mandatory                                         
disinfection of bottled water.                                                                      
              F.  Laboratory and Personnel Approval                                                 
     IBWA requested that the CGMP regulations be revised to                                         
include requirements for certification of laboratories that                                         
analyze water and of supervisory personnel.  The agency stated in                                   
the proposal that the act did not provide authority to the agency                                   
to require such approval, and that even if such authority were                                      
provided by the act, the agency lacked the resources to monitor                                     
analytical laboratories and personnel in the absence of a                                           
significant public health problem.  Under  129.35(a)(3)(iii),                                      
analysis of samples may be performed for the plant by competent                                     
commercial laboratories.  The agency did not receive comments                                       
concerning laboratory personnel.                                                                    
     111.  A number of comments urged FDA to require the use of                                     
certified laboratories to test bottled water.  Comments stated                                      
that laboratories performing analyses should be validated in some                                   
manner to ensure their competency, although FDA need not be the                                     
validator.  One comment stated that the public is better and more                                   
consistently protected by requiring that certified laboratories                                     
conduct the required analyses.                                                                      
     One comment stated that the compliance of bottled water with                                   
quality standards is directly related to the competence and                                         
reliability of the laboratories that perform the analysis for                                       
contaminants.  It stated that it is not clear what FDA means by                                     
"competent commercial laboratories."  It asked, concerning the                                      
criteria that would be used to determine whether a laboratory is                                    
competent, who would determine whether a laboratory meets these                                     
criteria, and how would a bottler be able to determine that a                                       
laboratory is able to provide valid test results.  The comment                                      
stated that the term "competent" is too vague and will not                                          
promote uniformity.  Another comment stated that the use of                                         
uncertified, "competent" laboratories provides little assurance                                     
that contaminants, even when present, will be detected.                                             
     Comments stated that, because EPA requires that                                                
determinations of compliance with its MCL's be based on data                                        
generated by a certified drinking water laboratory, it would be                                     
consistent with the spirit of the MOU between FDA and EPA for FDA                                   
also to require the use of certified laboratories.  The comments                                    
stated that FDA would not have to expend resources because                                          
certification programs are in place and administered by the                                         
States, with laboratories bearing the cost.  They added that                                        
FDA's adoption of a laboratory certification requirement would be                                   
consistent with its stated intent of incorporating EPA drinking                                     
water analytical methods for determining compliance with bottled                                    
water quality standards.                                                                            
     Comments stated that bottled water laboratory testing                                          
certification is a major problem that must be addressed by FDA.                                     
They stated that, currently, a number of State regulatory                                           
agencies require that bottled water sold in their States be                                         
tested in one of their State-certified laboratories, and that                                       
this issue causes undue replication expenses for multiple State                                     
licensing and hinders free interstate commerce.                                                     
     One comment stated that water bottlers should be encouraged                                    
to perform laboratory tests on site.  It stated that                                                
transportation to a certified laboratory can require considerable                                   
time and can delay results.  The comment stated that while it is                                    
important for a certified laboratory to serve as a reference,                                       
water bottlers would best serve the public by performing analyses                                   
on site.                                                                                            
     The agency disagrees that it should require the use of                                         
certified laboratories to test bottled water.  Under                                                
 129.35(a)(3)(iii), analysis of the water samples may be                                           
performed for the plant by competent commercial laboratories.                                       
Thus, laboratories used to analyze bottled water must be                                            
competent whether or not they have been certified competent.  A                                     
competent laboratory is one that is capable of performing the                                       
required analyses and of obtaining valid and accurate results                                       
from its analyses.  Any laboratory that has been certified by EPA                                   
or a State to test drinking water is deemed to be a competent                                       
laboratory.  EPA and State-certified laboratories may be used for                                   
comparative purposes against other commercial laboratories or a                                     
plant's own laboratory.  To clarify that the agency believes that                                   
EPA and State-certified laboratories are appropriate to perform                                     
water analyses to demonstrate compliance with parts 129 and 165,                                    
FDA is amending  129.35(a)(3)(iii) to specifically cite EPA- and                                   
State-certified laboratories as examples of competent                                               
laboratories.  Failure to have been certified will not preclude a                                   
laboratory from being considered competent, but the existence of                                    
such certification will eliminate any doubt about the                                               
laboratory's competency.                                                                            
     FDA agrees with the comment that stated that water bottlers                                    
should be encouraged to perform laboratory tests on site.                                           
Manufacturers of many types of foods effectively perform their                                      
own routine laboratory tests on their products.  To the extent                                      
possible, bottled water manufacturers should perform routine                                        
tests on bottled water.  For example, testing for microbiological                                   
quality must be conducted at least once a week for source water                                     
( 129.35(a)(3)), as often as necessary for product water                                           
( 129.80(a)), and at least once a week for the finished product                                    
( 129.80(g)(1)).  Manufacturers can obtain quick, reliable                                         
results using their own laboratories versus the time it would                                       
take to send the samples to a commercial laboratory.  However,                                      
firms must ensure the competency of their labs.                                                     
     The comments have not convinced the agency that the public                                     
health will be better protected by requiring the use of certified                                   
laboratories.  Regardless of the laboratory used for testing,                                       
water containing any substance at a level considered injurious to                                   
health is deemed to be adulterated (see section 402(a)(1) of the                                    
act and  165.110(d)).  Thus, the agency concludes that the                                         
public health is already protected.                                                                 
     The MOU between FDA and EPA delineates jurisdiction over                                       
types of drinking water but does not consider the issue of                                          
certified laboratories.  Although FDA incorporates EPA methods                                      
into the quality standard, FDA has yet to be convinced that only                                    
EPA-or State-certified laboratories are capable of using EPA                                        
methods.                                                                                            
     In response to the comment concerning States requiring                                         
additional testing in laboratories certified in their own States,                                   
the agency points out that regardless of whether it required the                                    
use of certified labs, the CGMP regulations are not preemptive                                      
and does not preclude States from establishing stricter                                             
requirements for bottled water sold in their States.                                                
                   G.  Annual Plant Inspection                                                      
     IBWA requested that FDA revise the CGMP regulations to                                         
include a requirement for annual plant inspections to ensure                                        
compliance with the regulations.  FDA stated in the January 1993,                                   
proposal that without a clear indication of a significant public                                    
health problem that could not be corrected by other means, there                                    
is no basis for FDA to adopt such a requirement for bottled                                         
water.  FDA recognized, however, that IBWA requires third party                                     
inspection of its member firms, and FDA encourages such self-regulated programs within industry.    
     112.  A number of comments stated that FDA did not provide                                     
sufficient rationale for not imposing annual plant inspection                                       
requirements on the growing bottled water industry.  Several                                        
comments stated that annual inspections would reduce the                                            
likelihood that bottlers would be out of compliance for extended                                    
periods of time.  One comment stated that, irrespective of who                                      
performs the inspection, FDA should require inspections at least                                    
biannually for bottled water plants.  It added that FDA could                                       
contract with State regulatory agencies to accomplish these                                         
inspections.                                                                                        
     Some comments encouraged FDA to consider third party                                           
inspections because third party inspections would ensure                                            
compliance with the regulations without requiring FDA to increase                                   
resource requirements.  One comment urged FDA to modify                                             
 129.80(g) to include a requirement for annual inspections by a                                    
qualified third party organization because it would address                                         
expressed State government concerns.  It stated that some State                                     
governments require that companies submit a report issued by a                                      
recognized organization that inspects bottled water systems for                                     
compliance with part 129 (i.e., NSF International or other                                          
organization, State, or country with an inspection protocol as                                      
stringent as NSF's).                                                                                
     The agency disagrees with the comments and affirms that, in                                    
the absence of a significant public health problem, the hazards                                     
from bottled water do not warrant this requirement.                                                 
     The monitoring/inspectional aspect of FDA's program is                                         
carried out by its field force.  The agency monitors and inspects                                   
bottled water products and processing plants as part of its                                         
compliance programs for foods.  There are roughly 30 compliance                                     
programs for foods covering the full range of potential food                                        
safety problems, including chemical contaminants, pesticides,                                       
filth, and food additives.  About one-half of the programs are                                      
for imported foods.  They provide broad guidance to the field on                                    
the agency's inspectional priorities.  The agency's work plan                                       
further specifies the number of inspections, sample collections,                                    
wharf exams, analyses, and other activities in each program by                                      
district.  The districts have considerable latitude as to the                                       
establishments that they inspect and the products that they                                         
examine to allow for adequate coverage of local problems and                                        
regionalized industry.                                                                              
     Bottled water establishments are covered under the general                                     
food safety program.  Bottled water plants, along with carbonated                                   
beverage bottling plants and warehouses, generally are assigned                                     
low priority for inspection.  Priorities are based on factors                                       
such as the potential for a public health problem and the                                           
violation rate of the industry.  When compared to products such                                     
as low-acid canned foods and products in which Listeria or                                          
Salmonella have a significant potential to develop, bottled water                                   
products are a relatively low public health problem.                                                
     FDA's experience over the years has supported that ranking                                     
(Ref. 24).  Studies of bottled water products have generally not                                    
found significant problems in these products (id).  Consequently,                                   
bottled water plants shipping in interstate commerce are                                            
inspected about once every 4 years, unless the firm is violative.                                   
The frequency of inspection of violative firms is accelerated                                       
depending on the number, significance, and recurrence of                                            
violations.  Furthermore, the districts follow up on consumer and                                   
trade complaints and other leads, as appropriate, on potentially                                    
violative bottled water products.                                                                   
     FDA also contracts with the States to perform some bottled                                     
water plant inspections.  The FDA district offices are generally                                    
in contact with their State counterparts to exchange information                                    
about compliance problems, inspectional coverage, and new food                                      
establishments.  In addition to FDA inspection, the State and                                       
local governments have their own inspection and licensing                                           
programs.  Therefore, FDA concludes that it need not mandate                                        
annual plant inspections for bottled water.                                                         
     113.  One comment suggested that FDA consider establishing                                     
specific criteria for the operation of a bottled water plant to                                     
ensure that there is compliance with CGMP's for bottled water                                       
manufacturing.  It stated that it is a lot easier for an                                            
inexperienced person to establish a bottling facility for water,                                    
capable of producing high volumes of product, than it is to start                                   
up with other food products.  The comment held that an effective                                    
licensing program is needed far more for this type of product                                       
than for other foods and beverages because of a greater risk to                                     
the public.                                                                                         
     Another comment suggested that FDA establish for its quality                                   
standards some type of monitoring timeframes along with deadlines                                   
for submission of monitoring results from State-approved drinking                                   
water laboratories.                                                                                 
     FDA notes that it has established a CGMP regulation in part                                    
129 for the processing and bottling of drinking water.  Thus, FDA                                   
has established regulations on how to operate a bottled water                                       
plant.  Bottled water produced in violation of part 129 is                                          
adulterated under section 402(a)(4) of the act in that the food                                     
has been prepared, packed, or held under unsanitary conditions                                      
whereby it may have become contaminated with filth, or whereby it                                   
may have been rendered injurious to health.                                                         
     Part 129 requires monitoring of the source water, product                                      
water, and finished product.  According to  129.35(a)(3),                                          
samples of source water must be taken and analyzed at a minimum                                     
frequency of once each year for chemical contaminants and once                                      
every 4 years for radiological contaminants.  Additionally,                                         
source water obtained from somewhere other than a public water                                      
system is to be sampled and analyzed for microbiological                                            
contaminants at least once each week.  Test and sample methods                                      
must be consistent with the minimum requirements set forth in                                       
 165.110(b).                                                                                       
     Product water samples must be taken after processing and                                       
before bottling, and analyzed as often as is necessary to assure                                    
the uniformity and the effectiveness of the processes performed                                     
by the plant ( 129.80(a)).                                                                         
     The compliance procedures for the finished product are set                                     
forth in  129.80(g).  A firm must test a representative sample                                     
of each product for bacteriological contamination at least once a                                   
week.  To ensure chemical, physical, and radiological quality, a                                    
manufacturer must take and analyze at least annually a                                              
representative sample of each product.  The finished bottled                                        
water must comply with the quality standard in  165.110(b).                                        
     Plants must retain all records required by part 129 for not                                    
less than 2 years, and these documents must be available for                                        
official review at reasonable times ( 129.80(h)).  These records                                   
must be available for FDA plant inspections.  The agency notes                                      
that it does not have the resources to review bottled water test                                    
results except during FDA plant inspections.                                                        
     Thus, while FDA has not established a licensing requirement                                    
for water bottlers, it has established a regulatory regime to                                       
ensure the safety and quality of bottled water products.                                            
                      H.  Recall Procedures                                                         
     IBWA requested that FDA establish specific recall procedures                                   
for bottlers and dealers in the CGMP regulations.  In the January                                   
1993 proposal FDA found no basis for this requested revision.                                       
     114.  A number of comments stated that FDA did not provide                                     
sufficient rationale in the proposal for not establishing specific recall procedures for bottlers an
d dealers in the                                                                                    
growing bottled water industry.                                                                     
     One comment stated that, although there should not be                                          
specific recall procedures in the regulations, language that                                        
requires that a written recall plan or document be maintained by                                    
the bottler should be included in the FDA regulations.  It stated                                   
that the existence of such a plan would ensure a quick response                                     
by a bottler in the event that a recall is necessary.                                               
     The agency notes that part 7 (21 CFR part 7), subpart C                                        
provides guidelines on policy, procedures, and industry                                             
responsibilities for recalls.  In  7.59, FDA advises firms to:                                     
(1)  Prepare and maintain a current written contingency plan for                                    
use in initiating and effecting a recall; (2)  use sufficient                                       
coding of regulated products to make possible positive lot                                          
identification and to facilitate effective recall of all                                            
violative lots; and (3)  maintain such product distribution                                         
records as are necessary to facilitate locating of products that                                    
are being recalled.  Such records should be maintained for a                                        
period of time that exceeds the shelf life and the expected use                                     
of the product.                                                                                     
     The agency notes that recall is a voluntary action that                                        
takes place because manufacturers and distributors carry out                                        
their responsibility to protect the public health and from                                          
products that present risks of injury or gross deception or are                                     
otherwise defective.  Recall is an alternative to an FDA court                                      
action for removing, distributed products from interstate                                           
commerce.                                                                                           
     FDA is not aware of any circumstances that establish that                                      
there is a unique problem with recalls of bottled water.                                            
Therefore, FDA concludes that the guidelines for recall                                             
procedures for foods are adequate.  If a firm refuses to                                            
undertake a recall that is requested by FDA, or where FDA has                                       
reason to believe that a recall would not be effective,                                             
determines that a recall is ineffective, or discovers that a                                        
violation is continuing, it may initiate seizure, multiple                                          
seizure, or other court action.                                                                     
                        V.  OTHER MATTERS                                                           
                            A.  Ozone                                                               
     The agency proposed to specify in  184.1563(d) that the                                       
term "bottled water," for purposes of this section, does not                                        
include mineral water with TDS greater than 500 ppm.  The agency                                    
stated that this action is necessary to ensure that FDA's                                           
rulemaking on the definition of bottled water in  165.110 does                                     
not inadvertently have the effect of expanding the permitted uses                                   
of ozone.                                                                                           
     115.  Two comments objected to the exclusion of mineral                                        
water from ozonation.  One of the comments stated that this                                         
exclusion conflicts with other FDA proposals to include mineral                                     
water as a bottled water.  It stated that California has                                            
permitted the ozonation of mineral water for many years, and that                                   
ozonation is by far the most common means of germicidal water                                       
treatment that California mineral water firms use.                                                  
     Another comment stated that there is no known reason to                                        
preclude ozonation as the antimicrobial agent for mineral water                                     
with TDS's greater than 500 ppm, provided that the maximum                                          
residual level requirements are met.  It stated that the                                            
difference between mineral water and bottled water is only how                                      
much ozonation is required, at what temperature, and for how long                                   
a period of time.                                                                                   
     The agency has reconsidered its January 1993, proposal in                                      
light of these comments and of its original decision to affirm                                      
the use of ozone in bottled water as generally recognized as safe                                   
(GRAS).  In that decision (47 FR 50209, November 5, 1982), FDA                                      
noted its 1968 opinion that ozone used to disinfect potable water                                   
is GRAS if it is used in accordance with CGMP and with the                                          
recommendations of the U.S. Public Health Service.  The only                                        
restriction was that the water must be potable.  FDA also noted                                     
the continuous use of ozone in Europe for disinfecting municipal                                    
water for nearly 70 years without any evidence of toxicity.  To                                     
ensure that the levels of any oxidation products formed are low                                     
and safe, the agency included a requirement in the GRAS                                             
affirmation regulation that the starting water, before ozonation,                                   
meet the microbiological, physical, chemical, and radiological                                      
quality standards for bottled water specified in  103.35(b)                                        
through (e).  FDA considers this requirement to be a clarification of what it considered to be CGMP,
 namely, that                                                                                       
ozone would not be used to disinfect polluted water.                                                
     A restriction on the use of ozone in mineral water with TDS                                    
greater than 500 ppm does not specifically address the goal of                                      
the proposal which was to ensure that the level of oxidation                                        
products do not exceed the levels anticipated when the GRAS                                         
affirmation regulation was issued.  The oxidation products of                                       
concern from the use of ozone that were considered in                                               
establishing the GRAS regulation were those from dissolved                                          
organic material, whereas the increased solids content of mineral                                   
water consists primarily of minerals (inorganic material).                                          
Moreover, the restriction in the GRAS affirmation regulation that                                   
the use of ozone in disinfecting water be in accordance with CGMP                                   
means that only water that meets the new standard in                                                
 165.110(b), which limits the amount of dissolved organic                                          
material that may be present, will be processed with ozone.                                         
Therefore, FDA has decided that there is no need to include the                                     
restriction limiting the TDS to 500 ppm for mineral water in the                                    
GRAS affirmation regulation for ozone.                                                              
     Of relevance in this regard is the fact that bromate can be                                    
formed when ozone is used on waters that contain sufficient                                         
levels of bromide (a mineral component).  EPA has conducted an                                      
evaluation of bromate and classified it as a probable human                                         
carcinogen because bromate administered to rodents in their                                         
drinking water has been shown to produce several types of tumors                                    
in both sexes.  EPA has proposed an MCLG for bromate of zero and                                    
an MCL of 10 micrograms (g)/L (59 FR 38668, July 29, 1994).  In the event EPA establishes an MCL fo
r bromate in drinking water,                                                                        
then in accordance with section 410 of the act FDA will propose                                     
to establish an allowable level for bromate in bottled water in                                     
 165.110(b).  The agency further emphasizes that water that is                                     
treated with ozone that results in bromate levels that may be                                       
injurious to health is adulterated under section 402(a)(1) of the                                   
act.                                                                                                
                      B.  Nutrition Labeling                                                        
     116.  One comment stated that it was concerned with the                                        
level of sodium that is allowed under the current regulations,                                      
while still allowing the label to claim that the food is "sodium                                    
free" or "salt free."  It stated that FDA permits the label to                                      
claim "sodium free" up to 21.1 ppm in bottled water.  The comment                                   
noted that bottlers who use ion exchange in their treatment                                         
process can actually add sodium to the bottled water.  The                                          
comment expressed concern about any regulation that permits                                         
advertising of "sodium free" when there actually is sodium in the                                   
bottled water.                                                                                      
     The agency discussed this aspect of its "sodium-free"                                          
regulation in the FEDERAL REGISTER of January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2302                                   
at 2321) and stated that it believes that it is appropriate to                                      
apply the term "free" to a nutrient when a food contains that                                       
nutrient in a dietetically trivial or physiologically                                               
inconsequential amount, even though the nutrient is present at a                                    
level at or near its reliable limit of quantitation.  With modern                                   
analytical methods, the level at which the presence of a nutrient                                   
may be quantified is becoming increasingly smaller.                                                 
     For example, there are almost no foods that can be said to                                     
be truly sodium free, yet the level of sodium present in some                                       
foods has no impact on the diet.  The Daily Recommended Value for                                   
sodium is 2,400 mg.  Thus, the agency concluded that a food                                         
containing less than 5 mg per reference amount customarily                                          
consumed (reference amount) could be considered sodium free                                         
because 5 mg is a dietarily insignificant fraction of 2,400 mg.                                     
The reference amount for bottled water is 240 mL.  Therefore, the                                   
claim "sodium free" may be used on a bottled water label if the                                     
sodium content is less than 5 mg per 240 mL serving (21 ppm).  If                                   
a "sodium free" claim is made, the bottled water must bear                                          
nutrition labeling in accordance with  101.9.                                                      
     The agency points out that although the term "salt" is not                                     
synonymous with "sodium," salt refers to sodium chloride.  Under                                    
 101.61(c)(1), the term "salt free" may be used on the label or                                    
in labeling of foods only if the food is "sodium free."                                             
     FDA recognizes that some sodium may be added to water during                                   
ion exchange treatment.  The label of the bottled water product                                     
treated in this manner could still qualify to bear the statement                                    
"sodium free" if the sodium content of the final product is less                                    
than 5 mg per 240 mL serving.  However, if the sodium content is                                    
5 mg or greater per 240 mL serving, the bottled water must bear                                     
nutrition labeling and could not be labeled as "sodium free."                                       
     117.  One comment asked that bottled water have a qualified                                    
exception from the nutrition labeling regulations except when a                                     
claim is made that the water contains a significant level of a                                      
nutrient or nutrients.  It stated that in that event, nutrition                                     
labeling for the nutrient for which the claim is made would be                                      
required.  The comment stated that, for example, if a bottled                                       
water bore a claim of "no sodium" or "no calories," it could be                                     
accompanied, on the information panel, by a statement, "not a                                       
significant source of _____" with the blank filled in with the                                      
items claimed in the statement.  Another comment questioned why                                     
the declaration "sodium free" would trigger a nutritional panel                                     
for information on fat and calories when it is common knowledge                                     
that water does not contain these nutrients.                                                        
     One comment requested that FDA exempt bottled water products                                   
other than mineral water from nutrition labeling.  It stated that                                   
consumers do not expect any nutrition from bottled water, except                                    
perhaps for some minerals in mineral water.  It suggested that                                      
bottled water with less than 250 ppm TDS (i.e., bottled water                                       
that is not mineral water) be exempted from nutrition labeling,                                     
even if fluoride is added.  It stated that label space was a                                        
problem.                                                                                            
     FDA notes that the requested exemptions and modifications                                      
for nutrition labeling fall outside the scope of this rulemaking.                                   
However, FDA discussed these issues in the final rule on                                            
nutrition labeling of January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2079 at 2149), and                                     
stated that:                                                                                        
               A recent IOM [Institute of Medicine|                                                 
                         report, "Food Labeling:  Toward National                                   
                         Uniformity" (Ref. 25), noted that many                                     
                         States have expressed concern about the                                    
                         heightened potential for consumer                                          
                         confusion because of the increased                                         
                         number of bottled water products on the                                    
                         market and the aggressive marketing and                                    
                         advertising claims of superiority made                                     
                         for them.  Thus, FDA maintains its                                         
                         position that nutrition information                                        
                         relating to food must be provided for                                      
                         all products, including bottled and                                        
                         mineral water, that contain more than                                      
                         insignificant amounts of any of the                                        
                         nutrients or food components that are                                      
                         required to be listed, or whose label,                                     
                         labeling, or advertising contains a                                        
                         nutrient content claim or any other                                        
                         nutrition information in any context.                                      
                         For products that qualify for the                                          
                         simplified format, if manufacturers                                        
                         voluntarily declare nutrients allowable                                    
                         under  101.9(c) that are not among the                                    
                         14 required nutrients (e.g., potassium),                                   
                         the required statement "Not a                                              
                         significant source of _____________," must be used, with the blank filled i
n with                                                                                              
                         the name of any of the 14 required nutrients                               
                         or food components that are not present or                                 
                         are present in insignificant amounts.                                      
                         Moreover, if a product is voluntarily                                      
                         enriched or fortified with added vitamins or                               
                         minerals, any such nutrients must be declared                              
                         using the simplified format and followed by                                
                         the above statement.  Thus, a product labeled                              
                         as "bottled water, minerals added" will have                               
                         to bear nutrition labeling.                                                
               * * *                                                                                
               Bottled water products containing juice                                              
                         or other flavors are subject to the same                                   
                         nutrition labeling requirements as any                                     
                         other food.  If a product meets the                                        
                         criteria for no nutritional                                                
                         significance, and no claims are made,                                      
                         then nutrition labeling is not required.                                   
                         A "sodium free" declaration on bottled                                     
                         water or on any other food label will                                      
                         trigger nutrition labeling, because such                                   
                         a claim promotes the nutritional                                           
                         properties of the product.                                                 
               As discussed previously under comment 92 of this document,                           
if fluoride is added to bottled water, and the label bears a                                        
statement to indicate this addition, other than in the ingredient                                   
statement, the label must bear nutrition labeling that complies                                     
with the simplified format.                                                                         
                          C.  Preemption                                                            
     118.  Comments from several States objected to the Federal                                     
standards of identity for bottled water preempting any State                                        
standards that are not identical to it, as some States have                                         
established regulations for bottled water that are more stringent                                   
than the FDA standard.  One comment stated that it is a                                             
fundamental right of a State to make regulations and standards                                      
that are at least as stringent as or more stringent than Federal                                    
regulations and standards.  It contended that FDA's role is more                                    
appropriately to establish Federal rules that will protect the                                      
public health and prevent fraudulent claims from being made that                                    
might mislead consumers of bottled water products.  Another Stateheld that it has made great effort
s to ensure that bottled water                                                                      
meets standards at least as stringent as those set forth in EPA's                                   
primary drinking water regulations.                                                                 
     A number of comments requested that FDA more clearly explain                                   
the scope of the preemption provision, and that it specifically                                     
address whether the agency interprets Federal preemption to apply                                   
to certain State requirements (i.e., labeling restrictions,                                         
laboratory certification, and certain testing requirements).                                        
     Comments asserted that many State regulations are costly and                                   
do not provide consumers with any more protection than is likely                                    
to be provided by those proposed by FDA.  One comment stated that                                   
FDA should emphasize that a given State should not be allowed to                                    
place an undue burden on interstate commerce by requiring that                                      
analyses be performed only in laboratories that are certified by                                    
that State, or that analyses be performed according to an unduly                                    
restrictive frequency unrelated to public health protection.  The                                   
comment added that regulatory activity by the States in areas                                       
such as standards and environmental protection is causing                                           
difficulties for those seeking to import goods into the United                                      
States.                                                                                             
     FDA notes that, under section 403A(a)(1) of the act (21                                        
U.S.C. 343-1(a)(1)), a State may not establish or continue in                                       
effect a standard of identity for a food that is the subject of a                                   
standard of identity under section 401 of the act if the State                                      
standard is not identical to the Federal standard.  Section                                         
403A(a)(1) of the act only effects preemption with respect to                                       
matters on which a Federal requirement exists.  If there is no                                      
Federal requirement to be given preemptive effect, preemption                                       
does not occur.                                                                                     
     Under  100.1(c)(4), if the State requirement is identical                                     
to the Federal law, there is no issue of preemption.  In                                            
addition, if the State requirement does the same thing that the                                     
Federal law does, even if the words are not exactly the same,                                       
then it is effectively the same requirement as the Federal                                          
requirement.  FDA's view, as embodied in  100.1(c)(4), is that                                     
such a State or local requirement is consistent with the Federal                                    
requirement.  Therefore, the only State requirements that are                                       
subject to preemption are those that are affirmatively different                                    
from the Federal requirements on matters that are covered by                                        
section 403A(a) of the act.                                                                         
     FDA acknowledges that some stringent State laws will be                                        
preempted by less restrictive Federal regulations.  However, one                                    
of the goals of the national uniformity provisions of the 1990                                      
amendments was to give industry some relief from some types of                                      
State requirements that interfere with their ability to market                                      
products in all 50 States in an efficient and cost-effective                                        
manner (Statement of Rep. Madigan, 136 Congressional Record                                         
H12954 (October 26, 1990)).  Thus, in enacting the 1990                                             
amendments, Congress apparently decided that even though Federal                                    
requirements may preempt more restrictive State requirements in                                     
certain instances, the net benefits from national uniformity in                                     
these aspects outweigh the loss in consumer protection that may                                     
occur as a result.                                                                                  
     The agency notes that certain State laws and regulations                                       
will not be preempted because FDA's requirements have not been                                      
given preemptive effect.  Therefore, a State will not be                                            
precluded from enforcing its provisions in such circumstances.                                      
The agency points out, for example, that FDA has not sought to                                      
give preemptive effect to part 129.  Therefore, if a State has                                      
stricter requirements than those in part 129, the State standard                                    
is not preempted by the Federal requirement.                                                        
     The agency advises that, in those instances where a State                                      
requirement is preempted and the State believes that there are                                      
significant protections of the public that will be lost as a                                        
result, the State may petition the agency to modify the standard                                    
in question.  FDA intends to give careful consideration to any                                      
such petitions that it receives.                                                                    
     119.  Some comments contended that many States have bottlers                                   
whose products do not cross State lines, thereby avoiding                                           
compliance with FDA regulations.  They suggested that the                                           
regulation should include all bottlers regardless of                                                
intrastate/interstate sales.                                                                        
     One comment from a State contended that by proposing to                                        
apply these standards only to interstate manufacturers, FDA                                         
establishes an undue logistical burden on regulatory agencies, as                                   
they would have to establish two levels of regulation.  The                                         
comment argued that more consistent regulation is possible by applying the same standards to all bot
tled water firms that                                                                               
desire to sell their products in a particular State.                                                
     The agency advises that the act only applies to food that is                                   
in, or is intended to be shipped in, interstate commerce.                                           
Sections 301 and 304 of the act (21 U.S.C. 331 and 334)                                             
specifically describe prohibited acts and liability for seizure of food that is held for sale in, i
s in, or has been shipped in                                                                        
interstate commerce.  FDA encourages States to apply the Federal                                    
standard to both interstate and intrastate commerce to eliminate                                    
two levels of regulation and to avoid undue logistical burdens.                                     
                         VI.  CONCLUSIONS                                                           
     After review and consideration of the comments received in                                     
response to the January 1993 proposal, FDA concludes that it                                        
should amend part 129 and establish part 165 as set forth in the                                    
proposal but with the specific modifications to the proposed                                        
regulation discussed in this document.  For the purposes of this                                    
final rule, certain changes, in addition to those discussed in                                      
this document, were made for editorial purposes, clarity, and                                       
consistency only.  These changes do not modify any matter of                                        
substance.                                                                                          
                    VII.  ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT                                                      
     The agency has previously considered the environmental                                         
effects of this rule as announced in the proposed rule (58 FR                                       
393, January 5, 1993).  No new information or comments have been                                    
received that would affect the agency's previous determination                                      
that there is no significant impact on the human environment and                                    
that an environmental impact statement is not required.                                             
VIII.                  ANALYSIS OF IMPACTS                                                          
     FDA has examined the impacts of the final rule under                                           
Executive Order 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L.                                   
96-354).  Executive Order 12866 directs agencies to assess all                                      
costs and benefits of available regulatory alternatives and, when                                   
regulation is necessary, to select regulatory approaches that                                       
maximize net benefits (including potential economic,                                                
environmental, public health and safety, and other advantages;                                      
distributive impacts; and equity).  According to Executive Order                                    
12866, a regulatory action is "economically significant" if it                                      
meets any one of a number of specified conditions, including                                        
having an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or                                           
adversely affect in a material way a sector of the economy,                                         
competition, or jobs.  A regulation is considered "significant"                                     
under Executive Order 12866 if it raises novel legal or policy                                      
issues.                                                                                             
     The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires agencies to analyze                                    
regulatory options that would minimize any significant impact of                                    
a rule on small entities.  In compliance with the Regulatory                                        
Flexibility Act, the agency certifies that the final rule will                                      
not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of                                   
small entities.  Therefore, under the Regulatory Flexibility Act,                                   
no further analysis is required.                                                                    
     In the economic assessment to the proposal in this                                             
rulemaking (58 FR 393), FDA considered the costs and benefits of                                    
taking this action.  FDA estimated compliance costs to be between                                   
$18 million and $21 million and benefits to be approximately $35                                    
million plus the value of any increase in interstate commerce                                       
that might occur because of the elimination of conflicting State                                    
regulations.  Thus, benefits were estimated to exceed costs by                                      
from $14 million to $17 million, plus the value of any increase                                     
in interstate commerce in bottled water.                                                            
     The comments to the proposal discussed three issues relevant                                   
to the economic assessment.  The first issue involves the ability                                   
of the product definitions adopted in this final rule to                                            
communicate information about bottled water products to                                             
consumers.  The second issue involves the cost of label changes.                                    
The third issue involves the economic consequences of the                                           
definitions and labeling requirements adopted in this final rule                                    
for particular bottled water manufacturers.                                                         
            A.  Ability of Definitions to Communicate                                               
                     Information to Consumers                                                       
                                                                                                    
     Some comments suggested or provided data indicating that                                       
some of the definitions for particular types of bottled water                                       
adopted in this final rule may not correspond to some consumers'                                    
current ideas about the essential features of various types of                                      
bottled water.  The implication of these comments is that the                                       
definitions adopted in this final rule will generate confusion                                      
over the characteristics of these products.                                                         
     Although FDA acknowledges that some of the definitions may                                     
not correspond to some consumers' current ideas about the                                           
essential features of some types of bottled water, this                                             
phenomenon does not necessarily imply that confusion over these                                     
products will be increased by this final rule.  In States in                                        
which these products are not currently defined, the terms                                           
currently used to refer to various bottled water products may                                       
also not correspond to some consumers' current ideas about the                                      
essential features of those types of bottled water.  Similarly,                                     
in States in which these products are already defined, the State                                    
definitions may also not correspond to some consumers' current                                      
ideas about the essential features of those types of bottled                                        
water.                                                                                              
     Other comments suggested that alternative definitions could                                    
be adopted that would be more consistent with most consumers'                                       
current ideas about the essential features of various types of                                      
bottled water than the definitions adopted in this final rule.                                      
These comments imply confusion will be greater under the                                            
definitions adopted in this final rule than under the alternative                                   
definitions.  Similarly, some comments suggested definitions                                        
already adopted by particular States are more consistent with                                       
consumers' current ideas about the essential features of various                                    
types of bottled water than the definitions adopted in this final                                   
rule.  These comments imply confusion will be increased if                                          
existing state definitions are superseded by the definitions                                        
adopted in this final rule.                                                                         
     For example, a number of comments suggested that most                                          
consumers believe "spring water" must be extracted from the                                         
natural orifice of a spring and not from a bore hole.  This final                                   
rule defines "spring water" to include water extracted from both                                    
the natural orifice of a spring and from a bore hole tapping the                                    
underground formation feeding the spring.  The comments imply the                                   
definition of "spring water" adopted in this final rule will                                        
generate greater confusion over the characteristics of this                                         
product than would a definition specifying that "spring water" be                                   
extracted from the natural orifice of a spring.  As discussed in                                    
the preamble to this document, FDA believes that these comments                                     
are in error, and that most consumers do not believe "spring                                        
water" must be extracted from the natural orifice of a spring.                                      
     Another comment discussed the results of a survey in which                                     
the majority of respondents thought "artesian well water" flowed                                    
to the surface due to natural pressure.  In contrast, the                                           
geological definition of an artesian well does not imply water                                      
from this type of well flows to the surface due to natural                                          
pressure.  The definition of "artesian well water" adopted in                                       
this final rule is consistent with the geological definition of                                     
an artesian well and does not require that this type of water                                       
flow to the surface due to natural pressure.  The comment                                           
suggested the definition adopted in this final rule will create                                     
more confusion over the characteristics of this product than                                        
would a definition specifying that "artesian well water" flows to                                   
the surface due to natural pressure.                                                                
     FDA acknowledges that many consumers may be unaware of the                                     
geological definition of an "artesian well," and that, in the                                       
short run, the definition of "artesian well water" adopted in                                       
this final rule may lead some consumers to be confused over the                                     
characteristics of this product.  However, in the long run, this                                    
confusion will be less than the confusion that would be generated                                   
if FDA failed to adopt a definition for this term or adopted a                                      
definition that failed to correspond to the accepted geological                                     
definition of an artesian well.  Adopting a standardized                                            
definition for this term will increase the ability of interested                                    
consumers to interpret this term.  Adopting a standardized                                          
definition consistent with accepted geological terminology will                                     
increase the ability of interested consumers to attain                                              
information on this type of water.                                                                  
     Comments also discussed a number of other elements of the                                      
definitions adopted in this final rule.  These comments are                                         
addressed in the preamble to this document.  These comments do                                      
not provide sufficient information to establish that alternative                                    
definitions would be more consistent with most consumers' current                                   
ideas about the essential features of various types of bottled                                      
water than the definitions adopted in this final rule.                                              
                  B.  The Cost of Label Changes                                                     
     Comments provided a wide range of estimates of the cost of                                     
relabeling bottled water products to conform to the proposed                                        
definitions and labeling requirements.  One comment suggested                                       
label changes will cost $2,000 per product, per location, not                                       
including the cost of the actual label.  Another comment                                            
suggested the cost of each label plate change alone will be $200.                                   
Another comment suggested it will cost a single firm "hundreds of                                   
thousands of dollars" to change their labels.                                                       
     In the economic assessment of the proposal in this                                             
rulemaking, FDA used an average relabeling cost of $45,000 per                                      
label change.  This cost estimate was based on information                                          
previously provided by a bottled water manufacturer.  Although                                      
the comments suggest the cost of relabeling may be highly                                           
variable across firms, and that the cost of relabeling may be                                       
lower than $45,000 per label for many firms, the comments do not                                    
provide sufficient information to determine an appropriate                                          
adjustment in the average cost of relabeling.                                                       
     Some comments implied that changes in advertising would also                                   
be required to accommodate the product definitions established                                      
under this final rule.  In the economic assessment to the                                           
proposal in this rulemaking, FDA did not consider these costs                                       
because FDA believed the proposed definitions were sufficiently                                     
broad that no firm legally selling a given type of bottled water                                    
would be unable to do so because of the proposed regulation.                                        
     One comment suggested 44 brands of bottled water currently                                     
marketed as mineral water in the United States would no longer be                                   
able to be marketed as mineral water under this final rule.                                         
However, the only brands listed in this comment were Mountain                                       
Valley, Volvic, and Poland Spring.  Based on the information                                        
available to the agency, this comment is in error.  It appears                                      
that no mineral water is actually being marketed under these                                        
brand names.                                                                                        
     Another comment suggested most of the mineral water sold in                                    
the world, including the U.S. market, is produced in Europe, and                                    
that these products currently exhibit a wide range of total                                         
dissolved solids (TDS) levels, from under 100 mg/L to over 1,000                                    
mg/L.  The implication of this comment is that some mineral water                                   
produced in Europe with less than 250 ppm TDS is currently being                                    
marketed as mineral water in the United States and would no                                         
longer be able to be marketed as mineral water under this final                                     
rule.  However, this comment did not identify any European brands                                   
that would actually be affected in this manner, and FDA is not                                      
aware of any such brands.                                                                           
     FDA, therefore, has no information that this final rule will                                   
require extensive modification of existing advertising.                                             
   C.  Economic Consequences of Definitions and Other Labeling                                      
     Requirements on Particular Bottled Water Manufacturers                                         
                                                                                                    
     A number of comments suggested that the definitions and the                                    
labeling requirements in this final rule will have a negative                                       
impact on the sales of some bottled water products and thus a                                       
negative impact on some bottled water manufacturers.                                                
     Two comments suggested that some water currently sold as                                       
mineral water would no longer be able to be sold as mineral water                                   
under this final rule, and that this would have a negative impact                                   
on the sales of those products.  This issue is different from the                                   
advertising cost issue, which is the context in which these same                                    
comments were discussed in the preceding section.  However, FDA's                                   
response to these comments is the same in this context as in the                                    
context of advertising costs.  FDA is not aware of any brand of                                     
mineral water that will no longer be able to be marketed as                                         
mineral water under this final rule.                                                                
     Another comment noted the definition of "bottled water" does                                   
not allow for the addition of ingredients such as minerals for                                      
flavor, sodium fluoride, flavors which comprise less than one                                       
percent by weight, and carbon dioxide.  According to this                                           
comment, many products currently sold simply as "bottled water"                                     
contain these ingredients, and that by causing these products to                                    
be labeled differently, this final rule will generate a                                             
tremendous adverse economic impact on the firms producing these                                     
products.  FDA believes this comment is in error because it is                                      
currently illegal to sell water containing these ingredients as                                     
simply "bottled water," and FDA is not aware of any products that                                   
are labeled in this manner.                                                                         
     Another comment suggested that if drinking water is not                                        
recognized by FDA as a specific type of bottled water, severe                                       
economic repercussions would occur for companies that currently                                     
sell bottled drinking water.  This final rule does not define                                       
"drinking water" as a specific type of bottled water, although it                                   
does allow for the use of the term "drinking water" as a synonym                                    
for "bottled water."  However, this comment provided no                                             
information to support the claim that consumers believe drinking                                    
water is a specific type of bottled water.  In addition, nearly                                     
all bottled water sold in the United States meets the conditions                                    
suggested in this comment as being peculiar to drinking water.                                      
Therefore, FDA does not believe the sales of drinking water will                                    
be significantly affected by this final rule.                                                       
     Another comment suggested that the additional labeling                                         
requirements for bottled water marketed for use in infant formula                                   
will cause a negative impact on the sales of these products and                                     
will effectively destroy this product line.  However, the comment                                   
provided no information to support this claim.  Therefore, there                                    
is no basis for FDA to take any action in reliance on this                                          
comment.                                                                                            
                         D.  Conclusions                                                            
     The economic assessment to the proposal in this rulemaking                                     
(58 FR 393) estimated net benefits of $14 million to $17 million                                    
plus the value of any increase in interstate commerce that might                                    
occur because of the elimination of conflicting State                                               
regulations.                                                                                        
     The previous economic assessment did not consider the                                          
potential effect of the definitions and labeling requirements on                                    
the level of consumer confusion over bottled water products.                                        
Accounting for this effect will probably increase estimated net                                     
benefits.  However, FDA has insufficient information to estimate                                    
this increase in net benefits.                                                                      
     In addition, the definitions and labeling requirements                                         
adopted in this final rule may result in a decrease in the sales                                    
of some products and an increase in the sales of other products.                                    
However, FDA has insufficient information to determine the size                                     
or significance of these effects.                                                                   
     Therefore, FDA estimates that the benefits of this final                                       
rule will exceed the costs by $14 million to $17 million, plus                                      
the value of any increase in interstate commerce which might                                        
occur because of the elimination of conflicting State regulations                                   
and the value of any reduction in consumer confusion over these                                     
products.                                                                                           
                                                        IX.  EFFECTIVE DATE                        
     FDA proposed that any final rule that was issued based upon                                    
the proposal would become effective 180 days following issuance                                     
of the final rule.                                                                                  
     120.  One comment asked FDA to consider the cost and phase-                                    
in considerations for bottled water companies whose main business                                   
involves 3-, 5-, or 6-gallon reusable polycarbonate silk-screened                                   
bottles.  The comment stated that these bottles, which are                                          
generally recycled when no longer fit for use, cost approximately                                   
$4 to $5 each and have a normal life span of 5 to 7 years,                                          
although they can last 10 years or longer.  It stated that a                                        
company with about $6 million in sales has an inventory of about                                    
200,000 bottles or a bottle investment of $800,000 to $1,000,000.                                   
The comment maintained that any change in labeling requirements                                     
has major potential expense implications for bottlers using 3-,                                     
5-, or 6-gallon polycarbonate silk screened bottles.  It held                                       
that any relabeling of these bottles with adhesive labels can be                                    
costly and presents potential problems in the washing process.                                      
It asked that consideration be given to extended phase-in periods                                   
for reusable bottles where a change in labels is required because                                   
of the new regulations.                                                                             
     Under section 403(g) of the act, a food is deemed to be                                        
misbranded if it purports to be, or is represented as, a food for                                   
which a definition and standard of identity has been prescribed                                     
by regulation unless it conforms to such definition and standard,                                   
and its label bears the name of the food specified in the                                           
definition and standard.  Thus, all bottled water labels must                                       
bear appropriate labeling in conformance with an effective                                          
standard of identity.                                                                               
     FDA recognizes that some bottled water labels will have to                                     
be modified to comply with the standard of identity for bottled                                     
water, even though the definitions are based on current meanings                                    
of terms.  The agency has provided for additional nomenclature                                      
(e.g., "drinking water") in this final rule, and as a result,                                       
many label changes that the comment may have anticipated will not                                   
be required.                                                                                        
     However, FDA realizes that it may be a hardship for some                                       
firms to make required label changes on reusable polycarbonate                                      
silk-screened bottles because these bottles are used for years                                      
before replacement, and replacement of an entire stock would be                                     
burdensome by the effective date of this final rule.  Therefore,                                    
the agency is allowing an alternative means of compliance whereby                                   
the labeling information required by the standard of identity                                       
that is otherwise required on reusable polycarbonate silk-                                          
screened bottles may be placed on the customer invoice or bill of                                   
lading that is provided with each delivery.  This alternative                                       
means of compliance is provided in lieu of having the labeling                                      
information required by the standard of identity permanently                                        
affixed to an existing bottle as otherwise required by section                                      
201(k) of the act.  This alternative means of compliance only                                       
applies to information on the polycarbonate silk-screened bottles                                   
and does not apply to information on the bottle cap.                                                
     The special labeling provision is provided for currently                                       
existing containers.  As a firm replaces the polycarbonate silk-screened bottles presently in use wi
th new ones, the required                                                                           
information must be permanently affixed to the new bottles.  To                                     
fulfill the intent of the act, all labeling on the invoice or                                       
bill of lading must be in compliance with FDA requirements.  The                                    
agency notes that this alternative means of compliance is                                           
consistent with that established for nutrition labeling under                                       
 101.9(g)(9).                                                                                      
                          X.  REFERENCES                                                            
     The following information has been placed on display in the                                    
Dockets Management Branch (address above), and may be seen by                                       
interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. Monday through                                         
Friday.                                                                                             
               1.  Codex Alimentarius, vol. XII, "Codex                                             
          Standards for Natural Mineral Waters and                                                  
          Edible Ices and Ice Mixes," Food and                                                      
          Agriculture Organization of the United                                                    
          Nations, World Health Organization, Rome,                                                 
          1982.                                                                                     
               2.  State of California, Chapter 639,                                                
          Assembly Bill No. 170, September 15, 1987.                                                
               3.  "The Surgeon General's Report on                                                 
          Nutrition and Health," DHHS, Public Health                                                
          Service Publication No. 88-50210 (Government                                              
          Printing Office Stock No. 017-001-00465-1),                                               
          U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,                                              
          DC, 1988.                                                                                 
               4.  Barness, Lewis A., Nutrition and                                                 
          Oral Health, "Pediatric Nutrition Handbook,"                                              
          3d Ed., American Academy of Pediatrics, Elk                                               
          Grove Village, IL, 1993.                                                                  
               5.  Heath, R. C., United States                                                      
          Geological Survey,  "Basic Ground-Water                                                   
          Hydrology," Water-Supply Paper 2220, United                                               
          States Government Printing Office, 1989.                                                  
               6.  The United States Pharmacopeia, 23d                                              
          Revision, United States Pharmacopeial                                                     
          Convention, Inc., Rockville, MD, 1995.                                                    
               7.  Association of Food and Drug                                                     
          Officials, "AFDO Model Bottled Water                                                      
          Regulation," 1986.                                                                        
               8.  Davis, S. A., memorandum to file, "A                                             
          Comparison of Definitions for Mineral Water,"                                             
          May 11, 1995.                                                                             
               9.  Freeze, R. A. and J. A. Cherry,                                                  
          "Groundwater," Prentice-Hall Inc., 1979.                                                  
               10.  Sax, N. I., and R. J. Lewis, Sr.,                                               
          "Hawley's Condensed Chemical Dictionary," Van                                             
          Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1987.                                                          
                                                                                                    
               11.  Florida Department of Agriculture                                               
          and Consumer Services, Bottled Water                                                      
          Plant/Dealer Application Information, July                                                
          23, 1992.                                                                                 
               12.  Sowards, R. D., Texas Department of                                             
          Health, letter to Janice F. Oliver, July 30,                                              
          1991.                                                                                     
               13.  Guralnik, David B., "Webster's New                                              
          World Dictionary of the American Language,"                                               
          Warner Books, Inc., 1983.                                                                 
               14.  Mississippi State Board of Health,                                              
          "Regulations Governing Bottled Water,"                                                    
          December 1991.                                                                            
               15.  International Bottled Water                                                     
          Association, Model Bottled Water Regulation,                                              
          January 24, 1991.                                                                         
               16.  O'Donnell, W. J., "Sanpellegrino,"                                              
          Proceedings of the Bottled Water Workshop, A                                              
          Report Prepared for the Use of the                                                        
          Subcommittee on Energy and Commerce, U.S.                                                 
          House of Representatives, U.S. Government                                                 
          Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1990.                                                    
               17.  The Council of the European                                                     
          Communities, "Council Directive of 15 July,                                               
          1980 on the Approximation of the Laws of the                                              
          Member States Relating to the Exploitation                                                
          and Marketing of Natural Mineral Waters,"                                                 
          Official Journal of the European Communities,                                             
          No. L. 229/1, 1980.                                                                       
               18.  Lathrop, Donald B.,                                                             
          "Bacteriological Counts on Infant Formulas                                                
          Mixed in the Home," Archives of Pediatrics,                                               
          73:451, 1956.                                                                             
               19.  Ducluzeau, R., S. Dufresne, and J.                                              
          M. Bochand, "Inoculation of the Digestive                                                 
          Tract of Axenic Mice with the Autochthonous                                               
          Bacteria of Mineral Water," European Journal                                              
          of Applied Microbiology, 2:127, 1976.                                                     
               20.  "Guidelines for Drinking-Water                                                  
          Quality," vol. 1, d. ed., World Health                                                    
          Organization, 1993.                                                                       
               21.  Mottram, V. H., "Human Nutrition,"                                              
          Edward Arnold Publishers, Ltd., 1963.                                                     
               22.  Allen, H. E., M. A. Halley-Henderson, C. N. Hass, "Chemical Composition         
          of Bottled Mineral Water," Archives of                                                    
          Environmental Health, vol. 44 (No. 2), p.                                                 
          102, March/April 1989.                                                                    
               23.  Vasconcelos, J. and S. Harris,                                                  
          "Consensus Method for Determining                                                         
          Groundwaters Under the Direct Influence of                                                
          Surface Water Using Microscopic Particulate                                               
          Analysis," USEPA Manchester Environmental                                                 
          Laboratory, Port Orchard, WA, October 1992.                                               
               24.  Troxell, T., "Role of the FDA in                                                
          Regulating Bottled Water," Proceedings of the                                             
          Bottled Water Workshop, A Report Prepared for                                             
          the Use of the Subcommittee on Energy and                                                 
          Commerce, U.S. House of Representatives, U.S.                                             
          Government Printing Office, Washington, DC,                                               
          1990.                                                                                     
               25.  Committee on State Food Labeling,                                               
          Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of                                                    
          Medicine, National Academy of Sciences, "Food                                             
          Labeling:  Toward National Uniformity,"                                                   
          National Academy Press, Washington DC, 1992.                                              
                         List of Subjects                                                           
21 CFR Part 103                                                                                     
     Beverages, Bottled water, Food grades and standards.                                           
21 CFR Part 129                                                                                     
     Beverages, Bottled water, Food packaging, Reporting and                                        
recordkeeping requirements.                                                                         
21 CFR Part 165                                                                                     
     Beverages, Bottled water, Food grades and standards,                                           
Incorporation by reference.                                                                         
21 CFR Part 184                                                                                     
     Food ingredients.                                                                              
     Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act                                      
and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food and                                       
Drugs, 21 CFR Chapter I is amended as follows:                                                      
              PART 103--QUALITY STANDARDS FOR FOODS                                                
                    WITH NO IDENTITY STANDARDS                                                      
                                                                                                    
     1.  The authority citation for 21 CFR part 103 continues to                                    
read as follows:                                                                                    
     AUTHORITY:  Secs. 201, 401, 403, 409, 410, 701, 721 of the                                     
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 341, 343,                                      
348, 349, 371, 379e).                                                                               
Subpart B--[Reserved|                                                                               
     2.  Subpart B, consisting of  103.35  Bottled water, is                                       
removed and reserved.                                                                               
   PART 129--PROCESSING AND BOTTLING OF BOTTLED DRINKING WATER                                      
     3.  The authority citation for 21 CFR part 129 continues to                                    
read as follows:                                                                                    
     AUTHORITY:  Secs. 402, 409, 701, 704 of the Federal Food,                                      
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 342, 348, 371, 374); sec. 361                                     
of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 264).                                                   
     4.  Section 129.35 is amended by revising paragraphs                                           
(a)(3)(ii) and (a)(3)(iii) and by adding new paragraph (a)(4) to                                    
read as follows:                                                                                    
 129.35  Sanitary facilities.                                                                      
     *           *           *           *           *                                              
     (a)  * * *                                                                                     
     (3)  * * *                                                                                     
     (ii)  Test and sample methods shall be those recognized and                                    
approved by the government agency or agencies having jurisdiction                                   
over the approval of the water source, and shall be consistent                                      
with the minimum requirements set forth in  165.110(b) of this                                     
chapter.                                                                                            
     (iii)  Analysis of the sample may be performed for the plant                                   
by competent commercial laboratories (e.g., Environmental                                           
Protection Agency-(EPA) and State-certified laboratories).                                          
     *         *         *         *         *                                                      
     (4)  Source water testing exemptions.  (i)  Firms that use a                                   
public water system for source water may substitute public water                                    
system testing results, or certificates showing full compliance                                     
with all provisions of EPA National Primary and Secondary                                           
Drinking Water Regulations pertaining to chemical contaminants                                      
(40 CFR parts 141 and 143), for the testing requirements of                                         
 129.35(a)(3).                                                                                     
     (ii)  Firms that do not use a public water system as the                                       
source of their water may reduce the frequency of their testing                                     
of that source, as well as the number of chemical contaminants                                      
for which they test the source water, if they can document that                                     
such reduction is consistent with a State-issued waiver under EPA                                   
regulations (40 CFR parts 141 and 143).                                                             
     (iii)  The finished bottled water must comply with bottled                                     
water quality standards (21 CFR 165.110(b)) and section 402(a)(1)                                   
of the act dealing with adulterated foods.                                                          
     *         *         *         *         *                                                      
     5.  Section 129.80 is amended by revising the introductory                                     
text of paragraph (g) to read as follows:                                                           
 129.80  Processes and controls.                                                                   
     *         *         *         *         *                                                      
     (g)  Compliance procedures.  A quality standard for bottled                                    
drinking water is established in  165.110(b) of this chapter.                                      
To assure that the plant's production of bottled drinking water                                     
complies with the applicable standards, laws, and regulations of                                    
the government agency or agencies having jurisdiction, the plant                                    
will analyze product samples as follows:                                                            
     *         *         *         *         *                                                      
     6.  New part 165 is added to read as follows:                                                  
                       PART 165--BEVERAGES                                                          
                  Subpart A--General Provisions                                                     
Sec.                                                                                                
                                                                                                    
165.3  Definitions.                                                                                 
                                                                                                    
   Subpart B--Requirements for Specific Standardized Beverages                                      
165.110  Bottled water.                                                                             
     AUTHORITY:  Secs. 201, 401, 403, 403A, 409, 410, 701, 721 of                                   
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 341,                                       
343, 343A, 348, 349, 371, 379e).                                                                    
                  Subpart A--General Provisions                                                     
 165.3  Definitions.                                                                               
     (a)  A lot is:                                                                                 
     (1)  For purposes of determining quality factors related to                                    
manufacture, processing, or packing, a collection of primary                                        
containers or units of the same size, type, and style produced                                      
under conditions as nearly uniform as possible and usually                                          
designated by a common container code or marking, or in the                                         
absence of any common container code or marking, a day's                                            
production.                                                                                         
     (2)  For purposes of determining quality factors related to                                    
distribution and storage, a collection of primary containers or                                     
units transported, stored, or held under conditions as nearly                                       
uniform as possible.                                                                                
     (b)  A sample consists of 10 subsamples (consumer units),                                      
one taken from each of 10 different randomly chosen shipping                                        
cases to be representative of a given lot, unless otherwise                                         
specified in a specific standard in this part.                                                      
     (c)  An analytical unit is the portion(s) of food taken from                                   
a subsample of a sample for the purpose of analysis.                                                
  Subpart B--Requirements for Specific Standardized Beverages                                       
 165.110  Bottled water.                                                                           
     (a)  Identity--(1)  Description.  Bottled water is water                                       
that is intended for human consumption and that is sealed in                                        
bottles or other containers with no added ingredients except that                                   
it may optionally contain safe and suitable antimicrobial agents.                                   
Fluoride may be optionally added within the limitations                                             
established in  165.110(b)(4)(ii).  Bottled water may be used as                                   
an ingredient in beverages (e.g., diluted juices, flavored                                          
bottled waters).  It does not include those food ingredients that                                   
are declared in ingredient labeling as "water," "carbonated                                         
water," "disinfected water," "filtered water," "seltzer water,"                                     
"soda water," "sparkling water," and "tonic water."   The                                           
processing and bottling of bottled water shall comply with                                          
applicable regulations in part 129 of this chapter.                                                 
     (2)  Nomenclature.  The name of the food is "bottled water,"                                   
"drinking water," or alternatively one or more of the following                                     
terms as appropriate:                                                                               
     (i)  The name of water from a well tapping a confined                                          
aquifer in which the water level stands at some height above the                                    
top of the aquifer is "artesian water" or "artesian well water."                                    
Artesian water may be collected with the assistance of external                                     
force to enhance the natural underground pressure.  On request,                                     
plants shall demonstrate to appropriate regulatory officials that                                   
the water level stands at some height above the top of the                                          
aquifer.                                                                                            
     (ii)  The name of water from a subsurface saturated zone                                       
that is under a pressure equal to or greater than atmospheric                                       
pressure is "ground water."  Ground water must not be under the                                     
direct influence of surface water as defined in 40 CFR 141.2.                                       
     (iii)  The name of water containing not less than 250 parts                                    
per million (ppm) total dissolved solids (TDS), coming from a                                       
source tapped at one or more bore holes or springs, originating                                     
from a geologically and physically protected underground water                                      
source, may be "mineral water."  Mineral water shall be                                             
distinguished from other types of water by its constant level and                                   
relative proportions of minerals and trace elements at the point                                    
of emergence from the source, due account being taken of the cycles of natural fluctuations.  No min
erals may be added to this                                                                          
water.                                                                                              
     (iv)  The name of water that has been produced by                                              
distillation, deionization, reverse osmosis, or other suitable                                      
processes and that meets the definition of "purified water" in                                      
the United States Pharmacopeia, 23d Revision, January 1, 1995,                                      
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
551(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  (Copies may be obtained from the                                         
United States Pharmacopial Convention, Inc., 12601 Twinbrook                                        
Pkwy., Rockville, MD  20852 and may be examined at the Center for                                   
Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC,                                   
or at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol St.                                     
NW., suite 700, Washington, DC), may be "purified water" or                                         
"demineralized water."  Alternatively, the water may be called                                      
"deionized water" if the water has been processed by                                                
deionization, "distilled water" if it is produced by                                                
distillation, "reverse osmosis water" if the water has been                                         
processed by reverse osmosis, and "__________ drinking water"                                       
with the blank being filled in with one of the defined terms                                        
describing the water in this paragraph (e.g., "purified drinking                                    
water" or "deionized drinking water").                                                              
     (v)  The name of water that, after treatment and possible                                      
replacement of carbon dioxide, contains the same amount of carbon                                   
dioxide that it had at emergence from the source may be                                             
"sparkling bottled water."                                                                          
     (vi)  The name of water derived from an underground                                            
formation from which water flows naturally to the surface of the earth may be "spring water."  Sprin
g water shall be collected                                                                          
only at the spring or through a bore hole tapping the underground                                   
formation feeding the spring.  There shall be a natural force                                       
causing the water to flow to the surface through a natural                                          
orifice.  The location of the spring shall be identified.  Spring                                   
water collected with the use of an external force shall be from                                     
the same underground stratum as the spring, as shown by a                                           
measurable hydraulic connection using a hydrogeologically valid                                     
method between the bore hole and the natural spring, and shall                                      
have all the physical properties, before treatment, and be of the                                   
same composition and quality, as the water that flows naturally                                     
to the surface of the earth.  If spring water is collected with                                     
the use of an external force, water must continue to flow                                           
naturally to the surface of the earth through the spring's                                          
natural orifice.  Plants shall demonstrate, on request, to                                          
appropriate regulatory officials, using a hydrogeologically valid                                   
method, that an appropriate hydraulic connection exists between                                     
the natural orifice of the spring and the bore hole.                                                
     (vii)  The name of water that meets the requirements under                                     
"Sterility Tests" <71> in the United States Pharmacopeia, 23d                                       
Revision, January 1, 1995, which is incorporated by reference in                                    
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR 51.  (Copies may be                                       
obtained from the United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc.,                                     
12601 Twinbrook Pkwy., Rockville, MD  20852 and may be examined                                     
at the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 200 C St.                                      
SW., Washington, DC, or at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol St. NW., suite 700,
 Washington, DC), may be                                                                            
"sterile water."  Alternatively, the water may be called                                            
"sterilized water."                                                                                 
     (viii)  The name of water from a hole bored, drilled, or                                       
otherwise constructed in the ground which taps the water of an                                      
aquifer may be "well water."                                                                        
     (3)  Other label statements.  (i)  If the TDS content of                                       
mineral water is below 500 ppm, or if it is greater than 1,500                                      
ppm,  the statement "low mineral content" or the statement "high                                    
mineral content", respectively, shall appear on the principal                                       
display panel following the statement of identity in type size at                                   
least one-half the size of the statement of identity but in no                                      
case of less than one-sixteenth of an inch.  If the TDS of                                          
mineral water is between 500 and 1,500 ppm, no additional                                           
statement need appear.                                                                              
     (ii)  When bottled water comes from a community water                                          
system, as defined in 40 CFR 141.2, except when it has been                                         
treated to meet the definitions in paragraphs (a)(2)(iv) and                                        
(a)(2)(vii) of this section and is labeled as such, the label                                       
shall state "from a community water system" or, alternatively,                                      
"from a municipal source" as appropriate, on the principal                                          
display panel or panels.  This statement shall immediately and                                      
conspicuously precede or follow the name of the food without                                        
intervening written, printed, or graphic matter, other than                                         
statements required by paragraph (c) of this section, in type                                       
size at least one-half the size of the statement of identity but                                    
in no case of less than one-sixteenth of an inch.                                                   
     (iii)  When the label or labeling of a bottled water product                                   
states or implies (e.g., through label statements or vignettes                                      
with references to infants) that the bottled water is for use in                                    
feeding infants, and the product is not commercially sterile                                        
under  113.3(e)(3)(i) of this chapter, the product's label shall                                   
bear conspicuously and on the principal display panel the                                           
statement "Not sterile.  Use as directed by physician or by                                         
labeling directions for use of infant formula."                                                     
     (4)  Label declaration.  Each of the ingredients used in the                                   
food shall be declared on the label as required by the applicable                                   
sections of parts 101 and 130 of this chapter.                                                      
     (b)  Quality.  The standard of quality for bottled water,                                      
including water for use as an ingredient in beverages (except                                       
those described in the labeling as "water," "carbonated water,"                                     
"disinfected water," "filtered water," "seltzer water," "soda                                       
water," "sparkling water," and "tonic water"), is as follows:                                       
     (1)  Definitions.  (i)  Trihalomethane (THM) means one of                                      
the family of organic compounds, named as derivatives of methane,                                   
wherein three of the four hydrogen atoms in methane are each                                        
substituted by a halogen atom in the molecular structure.                                           
     (ii)  Total trihalomethane (TTHM) means the sum of the                                         
concentration in milligrams per liter of the trihalomethane                                         
compounds (trichloromethane, dibromochloromethane,                                                  
bromodichloromethane and tribromomethane), rounded to two                                           
significant figures.                                                                                
     (2)  Microbiological quality.  Bottled water shall, when a                                     
sample consisting of analytical units of equal volume is examined                                   
by the methods described in applicable sections of "Standard                                        
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," 15th Ed.                                      
(1980), American Public Health Association, which is incorporated                                   
by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51                                   
(copies may be obtained from the American Public Health                                             
Association, 1015 15th St. NW., Washington, DC 20005, or a copy                                     
may be examined at the Office of the FEDERAL REGISTER, 800 North                                    
Capitol St. NW., suite 700, Washington, DC, or at the Center for                                    
Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 200 C St. SW., Washington,                                       
DC), meet the following standards of microbiological quality:                                       
     (i)  Multiple-tube fermentation method.  Not more than one                                     
of the analytical units in the sample shall have a most probable                                    
number (MPN) of 2.2 or more coliform organisms per 100                                              
milliliters and no analytical unit shall have an MPN of 9.2 or                                      
more coliform organisms per 100 milliliters; or                                                     
     (ii)  Membrane filter method.  Not more than one of the                                        
analytical units in the sample shall have 4.0 or more coliform                                      
organisms per 100 milliliters and the arithmetic mean of the                                        
coliform density of the sample shall not exceed one coliform                                        
organism per 100 milliliters.                                                                       
     (3)  Physical quality.  Bottled water shall, when a                                            
composite of analytical units of equal volume from a sample is                                      
examined by the method described in applicable sections of                                          
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,"                                     
15th Ed. (1980), which is incorporated by reference (the                                            
availability of this incorporation by reference is given in paragraph (b)(2) of this section), meet 
the following standards                                                                             
of physical quality:                                                                                
     (i)  The turbidity shall not exceed 5 units.                                                   
     (ii)  The color shall not exceed 15 units.1                                                    
     (iii)  The odor shall not exceed threshold odor No. 3.1                                        
     (4)  Chemical quality.  (i)(A)  Bottled water shall, when a                                    
composite of analytical units of equal volume from a sample is                                      
examined by the methods described in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(B) of                                      
this section, meet standards of chemical quality and shall not                                      
contain chemical substances in excess of the following                                              
concentrations:                                                                                     
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
                            SUBSTANCE                                                               
                         CONCENTRATION                                                              
                         IN MILLIGRAMS                                                              
                           PER LITER                                                                
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
        Arsenic.........................................                                            
        Chloride1.......................................                                            
        Iron1...........................................                                            
        Manganese1......................................                                            
        Phenols.........................................                                            
        Sulfate1........................................                                            
        Total dissolved solids1.........................                                            
Zinc...........................................                                                     
Organics:                                                                                           
     Endrin (1,2,3,4,10,10-hexachloro-6,7-epoxy-                                                    
     1,4,4a,5,6,7,8,8a-octa-hydro-1,4-endo,                                                         
       endo-5,8-dimethane naphthalene)..........                                                    
     Total Trihalomethanes......................                                                    
      0.05                                                                                          
    250.0                                                                                           
      0.3                                                                                           
      0.05                                                                                          
      0.001                                                                                         
    250.0                                                                                           
    500.0                                                                                           
      5.0                                                                                           
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
      0.0002                                                                                        
      0.10                                                                                          
                                                                                                    
     (B)  Analyses conducted to determine compliance with                                          
paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A) of this section shall be made in                                             
accordance with the methods described in the applicable sections                                    
of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and                                               
Wastewater," 15th Ed. (1980), or "Methods for Chemical Analysis                                     
of Water and Wastes," Environmental Monitoring and Support                                          
Laboratory (EMSL), EPA-600/4-79-020, March 1983, U.S.                                               
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), both of which are                                            
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51.                                                                                      
     (C)  Analyses for organic substances shall be determined by                                    
the appropriate methods set forth below.  The methods in                                            
paragraphs (b)(4)(i)(C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section are                                           
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51 and are described in "Standard Methods for                                            
Examination of Water and Wastewater," 15th Ed. (1980).  Copies                                      
may be obtained from the American Public Health Association, 1015                                   
Fifteenth St. NW., Washington DC 20005, and examined at the                                         
Office of the Federal Register 800 North Capitol St. NW., suite                                     
700, Washington DC, or the Center for Food Safety and Applied                                       
Nutrition, 200 C St. NW., Washington DC.  The methods in                                            
paragraphs (b)(4)(i)(C)(3) and (C)(4) are cross-referenced in 40                                    
CFR part 141, subpart C, Appendix C.                                                                
     (1)  "Methods for Organochlorine Pesticides in Industrial                                      
Effluents;"                                                                                         
     (2)  "Methods for Chlorinated Phenoxy Acid Herbicides in                                       
Industrial Effluents," November 28, 1973;                                                           
     (3)  "Part I:  The Analysis of Trihalomethanes in Finished                                     
Waters by the Purge and Trap Method;" which is cross-referenced                                     
in 40 CFR part 141, Subpart C, Appendix C;                                                          
     (4)  "Part II:  The Analysis of Trihalomethanes in Drinking                                    
Water by Liquid/Liquid Extraction," Method 501.2 which is cross-referenced in 40 CFR part 141, Subpa
rt C Appendix C;                                                                                    
     (ii)(A)  Bottled water packaged in the United States to                                        
which no fluoride is added shall not contain fluoride in excess                                     
of the levels in Table 1 and these levels shall be based on the                                     
annual average of maximum daily air temperatures at the location                                    
where the bottled water is sold at retail.                             TABLE 1                     
                                                                                                    
                                                  Fluoride                                          
                                                  concentration                                     
     Annual average of maximum daily air              in                                            
               temperatures (F)                  milligrams                                        
                                                  per liter                                         
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
53.7 and below...................................    2.4                                            
53.8-58.3........................................    2.2                                            
58.4-63.8........................................    2.0                                            
63.9-70.6........................................    1.8                                            
70.7-79.2........................................    1.6                                            
79.3-90.5........................................    1.4                                            
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
     (B)  Imported bottled water to which no fluoride is added                                      
shall not contain fluoride in excess of 1.4 milligrams per liter.                                   
     (C)  Bottled water packaged in the United States to which                                      
fluoride is added shall not contain fluoride in excess of levels                                    
in Table 2 and these levels shall be based on the annual average                                    
of maximum daily air temperatures at the location where the                                         
bottled water is sold at retail.                                                                    
                             TABLE 2                                                                
                                                                                                    
                                                  Fluoride                                          
                                                  concentration                                     
     Annual average of maximum daily air              in                                            
               temperatures (F)                  milligrams                                        
                                                  per liter                                         
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
53.7 and below...................................    1.7                                            
53.8-58.3........................................    1.5                                            
58.4-63.8........................................    1.3                                            
63.9-70.6........................................    1.2                                            
70.7-79.2........................................    1.0                                            
79.3-90.5........................................    0.8                                            
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
     (D)  Imported bottled water to which fluoride is added shall                                   
not contain fluoride in excess of 0.8 milligram per liter.                                          
     (iii)  Having consulted with EPA as required by section 410                                    
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the Food and Drug                                      
Administration has determined that bottled water, when a                                            
composite of analytical units of equal volume from a sample is                                      
examined by the methods listed in paragraphs (b)(4)(iii)(E)                                         
through (b)(4)(iii)(F), and (b)(4)(iii)(G) of this section, shall                                   
not contain the following chemical contaminants in excess of the                                    
concentrations specified in paragraphs (b)(4)(iii)(A) through                                       
(b)(4)(iii)(D) of this section.                                                                     
     (A)  The allowable levels for inorganic substances are as                                      
follows:                                                                                            
_________________________________________________________________                                   
Contaminant              Concentration milligrams per                                               
                              liter (or as specified)                                               
_________________________________________________________________                                   
Barium.............       2                                                                         
Cadmium............       0.005                                                                     
Chromium...........       0.1                                                                       
Copper.............       1.0                                                                       
Lead...............       0.005                                                                     
Mercury............       0.002                                                                     
Nitrate............       10 (as nitrogen)                                                          
Nitrite............       1 (as nitrogen)                                                           
                                                                                                    
Total Nitrate and Ni-                                                                               
  trite............       10 (as nitrogen)                                                          
Selenium...........       0.05                                                                      
_________________________________________________________________                                   
     (B)  The allowable levels for volatile organic chemicals                                       
(VOC's) are as follows:                                                                             
_________________________________________________________________Contaminant (CAS Reg. No.)         
     Concentration in                                                                               
                                          milligrams per liter                                      
_________________________________________________________________                                   
Benzene (71-43-2).................      0.005                                                       
Carbon tetrachloride (56-23-5)....      0.005                                                       
o-Dichlorobenzene (95-50-1).......      0.6                                                         
p-Dichlorobenzene (106-46-7)......      0.075                                                       
1,2-Dichloroethane (107-06-2).....      0.005                                                       
1,1-Dichloroethylene (75-35-4)....      0.007                                                       
cis-1,2-Dichloroethylene (156-59-                                                                   
  2)..............................      0.07                                                        
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene (156-                                                                    
  60-5)...........................      0.1                                                         
1,2-Dichloropropane (78-87-5).....      0.005                                                       
Ethylbenzene (100-41-4)...........      0.7                                                         
Monochlorobenzene (108-90-7)......      0.1                                                         
Styrene (100-42-5)................      0.1                                                         
Tetrachloroethylene (127-18-4)....      0.005                                                       
Toluene (108-88-3)................      1                                                           
1,1,1-Trichloroethane (71-55-6)...      0.20                                                        
Trichloroethylene (79-01-6).......      0.005                                                       
Vinyl chloride (75-01-4)..........      0.002                                                       
Xylenes (1330-20-7)...............      10                                                          
_________________________________________________________________                                   
     (C) The allowable levels for pesticides and other synthetic                                    
organic chemicals (SOC's) are as follows:                                                           
_________________________________________________________________                                   
Contaminant (CAS Reg. No.)                 Concentration in                                         
                                             milligrams per liter                                   
_________________________________________________________________                                   
Alachlor (15972-60-8)......................   0.002                                                 
Atrazine (1912-24-9).......................   0.003                                                 
Carbofuran (1563-66-2).....................   0.04                                                  
Chlordane (57-74-9)........................   0.002                                                 
1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane (96-12-8)......   0.0002                                                
2,4-D (94-75-7)............................   0.07                                                  
Ethylene dibromide (106-93-4)..............   0.00005                                               
Heptachlor (76-44-8).......................   0.0004                                                
Heptachlor epoxide (1024-57-3).............   0.0002                                                
Lindane (58-89-9)..........................   0.0002                                                
Methoxychlor (72-43-5).....................   0.04                                                  
Pentachlorophenol (87-86-5)................   0.001                                                 
PCB's (as decachlorobiphenyl) (1336-36-3)..   0.0005                                                
Toxaphene (8001-35-2)......................   0.003                                                 
2,4,5-TP (Silvex) (93-72-1)................   0.05                                                  
_________________________________________________________________                                   
     (D)  The allowable levels for certain chemicals for which                                      
EPA has established secondary maximum contaminant levels in its                                     
drinking water regulations (40 CFR part 143) are as follows:                                        
_________________________________________________________________                                   
          Contaminant                        Concentration in                                       
                                             milligrams per liter                                   
_________________________________________________________________                                   
          Aluminum                                  0.2                                             
          Silver                                    0.1                                             
_________________________________________________________________                                   
     (E)  Analyses to determine compliance with the requirements                                    
of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(A) of this section shall be conducted in                                   
accordance with an applicable method and applicable revisions to                                    
the methods listed in paragraphs (b)(4)(iii)(E)(1) through                                          
(b)(4)(iii)(E)(13) of this section and described, unless                                            
otherwise noted, in "Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and                                     
Wastes," U.S. EPA, Environmental Monitoring and Support                                             
Laboratory (EPA-600/4-79-020), March 1983, which is incorporated                                    
by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR Part                                      
51.  Copies of this publication are available from the National                                     
Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, 5825                                    
Port Royal Rd., Springfield, VA  22161, or may be examined at the                                   
Office of Plant and Dairy Foods and Beverages (HFS-305), Center                                     
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food and Drug                                                
Administration, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC, or at the Office                                     
of the FEDERAL REGISTER, 800 North Capitol St. NW., suite 700,                                      
Washington, DC.                                                                                     
     (1)  [Reserved|                                                                                
     (2)  Barium shall be measured using the following methods:                                     
     (i)  Method 208.2--"Atomic Absorption; furnace technique,"                                     
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51, or                                                                        
     (ii)  Method 208.1--"Atomic Absorption; direct aspiration,"                                    
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation                                   
by reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(A) of this                                           
section.                                                                                            
     (iii)  Method 200.7--"Determination of Metals and Trace                                        
Elements in Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic                                   
Emission Spectrometry," Rev. 3.3, April 1991.  The revision is                                      
contained in the manual entitled "Methods for the Determination                                     
of Metals in Environmental Samples," Office of Research and                                         
Development, Washington, DC  20460, (EPA/600/4-91/010), June                                        
1991, which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5                                       
U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  Copies of this publication are                                    
available from the National Technical Information Service, U.S.                                     
Department of Commerce, 5825 Port Royal Rd., Springfield, VA                                        
22161, or may be examined at the Office of Plant and Dairy Foods                                    
and Beverages (HFS-305), Center for Food Safety and Applied                                         
Nutrition, Food and Drug Administration, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC, or at the Office of the FEDE
RAL REGISTER, 800                                                                                   
North Capitol St. NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.                                                   
     (3)  [Reserved|                                                                                
     (4)  Cadmium shall be measured using the following methods:                                    
     (i)  Method 213.2--"Atomic Absorption; furnace technique,"                                     
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation                                   
by reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E) of this                                           
section.                                                                                            
     (ii)  Method 200.7--"Determination of Metals and Trace                                         
Elements in Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic                                   
Emission Spectrometry," Rev. 3.3, April 1991.  The revision is                                      
contained in the manual entitled "Methods for the Determination                                     
of Metals in Environmental Samples," Office of Research and                                         
Development,(EPA/600/4-91/010), June 1991, which is incorporated                                    
by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part                                      
51.  The availability of this incorporation by reference is given                                   
in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)(2)(iii) of this section.                                                
     (5)  Chromium shall be measured using the following methods:                                   
     (i)  Method 218.2--"Atomic Absorption; furnace technique,"                                     
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation                                   
by reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E) of this                                           
section.                                                                                            
     (ii)  Method 200.7--"Determination of Metals and Trace                                         
Elements in Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-AtomicEmission Spectrometry," Rev. 3.3, 
April 1991.  The revision is                                                                        
contained in the manual entitled "Methods for the Determination                                     
of Metals in Environmental Samples," Office of Research and                                         
Development, (EPA/600/4-91/010), June 1991, which is incorporated                                   
by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part                                      
51.  The availability of this incorporation by reference is given                                   
in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)(1)(iii) of this section.                                                
     (6)  Copper shall be measured as total recoverable metal                                       
without filtration using the following methods:                                                     
     (i)  Method 220.2--Atomic Absorption; furnace technique, in                                    
"Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes," which is                                       
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51, or                                                                                   
     (ii)  Method 220.1--Atomic Absorption; direct aspiration, in                                   
"Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes," which is                                       
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation by                                           
reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E) of this section.                                     
     (iii)  Method 200.7--"Determination of Metals and Trace                                        
Elements in Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic                                   
Emission Spectrometry," Rev. 3.3, April 1991.  The revision is                                      
contained in the manual entitled "Methods for the Determination                                     
of Metals in Environmental Samples," Office of Research and                                         
Development, (EPA/600/4-91/010), June 1991, which isincorporated by reference in accordance with 5 
U.S.C. 552(a) and                                                                                   
1 CFR part 51.  Copies of this publication are available from the                                   
National Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of                                          
Commerce, 5825 Port Royal Rd., Springfield, VA  22161, or may be                                    
examined at the Office of Plant and Dairy Foods and Beverages                                       
(HFS-305), Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food and                                   
Drug Administration, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC  20204, or at                                    
the Office of the FEDERAL REGISTER, 800 North Capitol St. NW.,                                      
suite 700, Washington, DC.                                                                          
     (iv)  Method 200.8--"Determination of Trace Elements in                                        
Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass                                                 
Spectrometry," Rev. 4.4, April 1991.  The revision is contained                                     
in the manual entitled "Methods for the Determination of Metals                                     
in Environmental Samples," June 1991, which is incorporated by                                      
reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.                                     
The availability of this incorporation by reference is given in                                     
paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)(7)(iii) of this section.                                                   
     (v)  Method 200.9--"Determination of Trace Elements by                                         
Stabilized Temperature Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption                                           
Spectrometry," Revision 1.2, April 1991.  The revision is                                           
contained in the manual entitled "Methods for the Determination                                     
of Metals in Environmental Samples," June 1991, which is                                            
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporationby reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii
)(E)(2)(iii) of this                                                                                
section.                                                                                            
     (7)  [Reserved|                                                                                
     (8)  Lead shall be measured as total recoverable metal                                         
without filtration using the following methods:                                                     
     (i)  Method 239.2--Atomic Absorption; furnace technique, in                                    
"Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes," which is                                       
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation by                                           
reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)(2)(iii) of this                                      
section.                                                                                            
     (ii)  Method 200.8--"Determination of Trace Elements in                                        
Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass                                                 
Spectrometry," Revision 4.4, April 1991.  The revision is                                           
contained in the manual entitled "Methods for the Determination                                     
of Metals in Environmental Samples," June 1991, which is                                            
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation by                                           
reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)(7)(iii) of this                                      
section.                                                                                            
     (iii)  Method 200.9--"Determination of Trace Elements by                                       
Stabilized Temperature Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption                                           
Spectrometry," Rev. 1.2, April 1991.  The revision is contained                                     
in the manual entitled "Methods for the Determination of Metals                                     
in Environmental Samples," June 1991, which is incorporated by                                      
reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.                                     
The availability of this incorporation by reference is given in                                     
paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)(2)(iii) of this section.                                                   
     (9)  Mercury shall be measured using the following methods:                                    
     (i)  Method 245.1--"Manual cold vapor technique," which is                                     
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51, or                                                                                   
     (ii)  Method 245.2--"Automated cold vapor technique," which                                    
is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a)                                     
and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation by                                       
reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E) of this section.                                     
     (10)  [Reserved|                                                                               
     (11)  Nitrate and/or nitrite shall be measured using the                                       
following methods:                                                                                  
     (i)  Method 353.3--"Spectrophotometric cadmium reduction,"                                     
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51, or                                                                        
     (ii)  Method 353.2--"Colorimetric, automated, cadmium                                          
reduction," which is incorporated by reference in accordance with                                   
5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.                                                                  
     (iii)  Method 300.0--"The Determination of Inorganic Anions                                    
in Water by Ion chromatography," which is incorporated by                                           
reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.                                     
Copies of this publication are available from the National                                          
Technical Information Service, Port Royal Rd., Springfield, VA                                      
22161, or may be examined at the Office of Plant and Dairy Foods                                    
and Beverages (HFS-305), Center for Food Safety and Applied                                         
Nutrition, Food and Drug Administration, 200 C St. SW.,                                             
Washington, DC.                                                                                     
     (iv)  Method 353.1--"Colorimetric, automated, hydrazine                                        
reduction," which is incorporated by reference in accordance with                                   
5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this                                        
incorporation by reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)                                     
of this section.                                                                                    
     (12)  Selenium shall be measured using the following                                           
methods:                                                                                            
     (i)  Method 270.2--"Atomic Absorption; furnace technique,"                                     
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51, or                                                                        
     (ii)  Method 270.3--"Atomic Absorption; gaseous hydride,"                                      
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation                                   
by reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E) of this                                           
section.                                                                                            
     (13) [Reserved|                                                                                
     (F)  Analyses to determine compliance with the requirements                                    
of paragraphs (b)(4)(iii)(B) and (b)(4)(iii)(C) of this section                                     
shall be conducted in accordance with an applicable method or                                       
applicable revisions to the methods listed in paragraphs                                            
(b)(4)(iii)(F)(1) through (b)(4)(iii)(F)(20) of this section and                                    
described, unless otherwise noted, in "Methods for the                                              
Determination of Organic Compounds in Drinking Water,"  Office of                                   
Research and Development, Environmental Monitoring Systems Laboratory EPA/600/4-88/039, December 198
8, which is incorporated                                                                            
by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part                                      
51.  Copies of this publication are available from the National                                     
Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, 5285                                    
Port Royal Rd., Springfield, VA  22161, or may be examined at the                                   
Office of Plant and Dairy Foods and Beverages (HFS-305), Center                                     
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food and Drug                                                
Administration, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC, or at the Office                                     
of the FEDERAL REGISTER, 800 North Capitol St. NW., suite 700,                                      
Washington, DC.                                                                                     
     (1)  Method 502.1--"Volatile Halogenated Organic Compounds                                     
in Water by Purge and Trap Gas Chromatography," Rev. 2.0, 1989,                                     
(applicable to VOC's), which is incorporated by reference in                                        
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51, or                                               
     (2)  Method 502.2--"Volatile Organic Compounds in Water by                                     
Purge and Trap Capillary Column Gas Chromatography with                                             
Photoionization and Electrolytic Conductivity Detectors in                                          
Series," Rev. 2.0, 1989 (applicable to VOC's), which is                                             
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51, or                                                                                   
     (3)  Method 503.1--"Volatile Aromatic and Unsaturated                                          
Organic Compounds in Water by Purge and Trap Gas Chromatography,"                                   
Rev. 2.0, 1989 (applicable to VOC's), which is incorporated by                                      
reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51,                                     
or                                                                                                  
     (4)  Method 524.1--"Measurement of Purgeable Organic                                           
Compounds in Water by Packed Column Gas Chromatography/MassSpectrometry," Rev. 3.0, 1989 (applicabl
e to VOC's), which is                                                                               
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51, or                                                                                   
     (5)  Method 524.2--"Measurement of Purgeable Organic                                           
Compounds in Water by Capillary Column Gas Chromatography/Mass                                      
Spectrometry," Rev. 3.0, 1989 (applicable to VOC's), which is                                       
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51, or                                                                                   
     (6)  Method 504--"1,2-Dibromoethane (EDB) and 1,2-Dibromo-3-Chloropropane (DBCP) in Water by Mi
croextraction and Gas                                                                               
Chromatography," Rev. 2.0, 1989 (applicable to                                                      
dibromochloropropane (DBCP) and ethylene dibromide (EDB)), which                                    
is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a)                                     
and 1 CFR part 51, or                                                                               
     (7)  Method 505--"Analysis of Organohalide Pesticides and                                      
Commercial Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB) Products in Water by                                      
Micro-Extraction and Gas Chromatography," Rev. 2.0, 1989                                            
(applicable to alachlor, atrazine, chlordane, heptachlor,                                           
heptachlor epoxide, lindane, methoxychlor, toxaphene and as a                                       
screen for polychlorinated biphenyl's (PCB's)), which is                                            
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and                                    
1 CFR part 51, or                                                                                   
     (8)  [Reserved|                                                                                
     (9)  Method 507--"Determination of Nitrogen- and Phosphorus-Containing Pesticides in Water by G
as Chromatography with a                                                                            
Nitrogen-Phosphorus Detector," Rev. 2.0, 1989 (applicable to                                        
alachlor and atrazine), which is incorporated by reference in                                       
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51, or                                               
     (10)  Method 508--"Determination of Chlorinated Pesticides                                     
in Water by Gas Chromatography with an Electron Capture                                             
Detector," Rev. 3.0, 1989 (applicable to chlordane, heptachlor,                                     
heptachlor epoxide, lindane, methoxychlor, toxaphene, and as a                                      
screen for PCB's), which is incorporated by reference in                                            
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51, or                                               
     (11)  Method 508A--"Screening for Polychlorinated Biphenyls                                    
by Perchlorination and Gas Chromatography," Rev. 1.0, 1989 (used                                    
to quantitate PCB's as decachlorobiphenyl if detected in methods                                    
505 or 508) in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(F)(7) or (b)(4)(iii)(F)(9)                                     
of this section, respectively), which is incorporated by                                            
reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51,                                     
or                                                                                                  
     (12)  Method 515.1--"Determination of Chlorinated Acids in                                     
Water by Gas Chromatography with an Electron Capture Detector,"                                     
Rev. 5.0, May 1991 (applicable to 2,4-D, 2,4,5-TP (Silvex) and                                      
pentachlorophenol), which is incorporated by reference in                                           
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51, or                                               
     (13)  Method 525.1--"Determination of Organic Compounds in                                     
Drinking Water by Liquid-Solid Extraction and Capillary Column                                      
Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry," Rev. 2.2, May 1991                                           
(applicable to alachlor, atrazine, chlordane, heptachlor,                                           
heptachlor epoxide, lindane, methoxychlor, and                                                      
pentachlorophenol), which is incorporated by reference in                                           
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51, or                                               
     (14)  Method 531.1--"Measurement of N-Methylcarbamoyloximes                                    
and N-Methylcarbamates in Water by Direct Aqueous Injection HPLC                                    
with Post Column Derivatization," Rev. 3.0, 1989 (applicable to                                     
carbofuran), which is incorporated by reference in accordance                                       
with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this                                   
incorporation by reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(F)                                     
of this section.                                                                                    
     (15)  [Reserved|                                                                               
     (G)  Analyses to determine compliance with the requirements                                    
of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(D) of this section shall be conducted in                                   
accordance with an applicable method and applicable revisions to                                    
the methods listed in paragraphs (b)(4)(iii)(G)(1) and                                              
(b)(4)(iii)(G)(2) of this section and described, unless otherwise                                   
noted, in "Methods of Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes,"                                       
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation                                   
by reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E) of this                                           
section.                                                                                            
     (1)  Aluminum shall be measured using the following methods:                                   
     (i)  Method 202.1--"Atomic Absorption; direct aspiration                                       
technique," which is incorporated by reference in accordance with                                   
5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.                                                                  
     (ii)  Method 202.2--"Atomic Absorption; furnace technique,"                                    
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation                                   
by reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E) of this                                           
section.                                                                                            
     (iii)  Method 200.7--"Determination of Metals and Trace                                        
Elements in Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic                                   
Emission Spectrometry,"  Rev. 3.3, April 1991, The revision is                                      
contained in "Methods for the Determination of Metals in                                            
Environmental Samples," which is incorporated by reference in                                       
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The                                             
availability of the incorporation by reference is given in                                          
paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)(2)(iii) of this section.                                                   
     (iv)  Method 200.8--"Determination of Trace Elements in                                        
Waters and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass                                                
Spectrometry," Rev. 4.4, April 1991, The revision is contained in                                   
"Methods for the Determination of Metals in Environmental                                           
Samples," which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5                                   
U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this                                          
incorporation by reference is given in paragraph                                                    
(b)(4)(iii)(E)(1)(iii) of this section.                                                             
     (v)  Method 200.9--"Determination of Trace Elements by                                         
Stabilized Temperature Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption,                                          
Spectrometry," Rev. 1.2, April 1991, The revision is contained in                                   
"Methods for the Determination of Metals in Environmental                                           
Samples," June 1991, which is incorporated by reference in                                          
accordance with 5. U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The                                            
availability of this incorporation by reference is given in                                         
paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)(7)(iii) of this section.                                                   
     (2)  Silver shall be measured using the following methods:                                     
     (i)  Method 272.1--"Atomic Absorption, direct aspiration,"                                     
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51, or                                                                        
     (ii)  Method 272.2--"Atomic Absorption, furnace technique,"                                    
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C.                                      
552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation                                   
by reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E) of this                                           
section.                                                                                            
     (iii)  Method 200.7--"Determination of Metals and Trace                                        
Elements in Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic                                   
Emission Spectrometry," Rev. 3.3, April 1991, The revision is                                       
contained in "Methods for the Determination of Metals in                                            
Environmental Samples," which is incorporated by reference in                                       
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The                                             
availability of this incorporation by reference is given in                                         
paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)(1)(iii) of this section.                                                   
     (iv)  Method 200.8--"Determination of Trace Elements in                                        
Waters and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass                                                
Spectrometry," Rev. 4.4, April 1991, The revision is contained in                                   
"Methods for the Determination of Metals in Environmental                                           
Samples," which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5                                   
U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this                                          
incorporation by reference is given in paragraph                                                    
(b)(4)(iii)(E)(1)(iii) of this section.                                                             
     (v)  Method 200.9--"Determination of Trace Elements by                                         
Stabilized Temperature Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption,                                          
Spectrometry," Rev. 1.2, April 1991, in "Methods for the                                            
Determination of Metals in Environmental Samples," which is                                         
incorporated by reference in accordance with 5. U.S.C. 552(a) and                                   
1 CFR part 51.  The availability of this incorporation by                                           
reference is given in paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(E)(1)(iii) of this                                      
section.                                                                                            
     (3) and (4) [Reserved|                                                                         
     (5)  Radiological quality.  (i)  Bottled water shall, when a                                   
composite of analytical units of equal volume from a sample is                                      
examined by the methods described in paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of this                                   
section, meet standards of radiological quality as follows:                                         
     (A)  The bottled water shall not contain a combined radium-226 and radium-228 activity in exces
s of 5 picocuries per liter                                                                         
of water.                                                                                           
     (B)  The bottled water shall not contain a gross alpha                                         
particle activity (including radium-226, but excluding radon and                                    
uranium) in excess of 15 picocuries per liter of water.                                             
     (C)  The bottled water shall not contain beta particle and                                     
photon radioactivity from manmade radionuclides in excess of that                                   
which would produce an annual dose equivalent to the total body                                     
or any internal organ of 4 millirems per year calculated on the                                     
basis of an intake of 2 liters of the water per day.  If two or                                     
more beta or photon-emitting radionuclides are present, the sum                                     
of their annual dose equivalent to the total body or to any                                         
internal organ shall not exceed 4 millirems per year.                                               
     (ii)  Analyses conducted to determine compliance with                                          
paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section shall be made in accordance                                     
with the methods described in the applicable sections of                                            
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,"                                     
15th Ed. (1980), and "Interim Radiochemical Methodology for                                         
Drinking Water," U.S. EPA, EMSL, EPA-600/4-75-008 (Revised),                                        
March 1976, both of which are incorporated by reference.  The                                       
availability of these incorporations by reference is given in                                       
paragraph (b)(2) of this section.                                                                   
     (c)  Label statements.  When the microbiological, physical,                                    
chemical, or radiological quality of bottled water is below that                                    
prescribed by paragraphs (b)(2) through (b)(5), of this section,                                    
the label shall bear the statement of substandard quality                                           
specified in  130.14(a) of this chapter except that, as                                            
appropriate, instead of or in addition to the statement specified                                   
in  130.14(a) the following statement(s) shall be used:                                            
     (1)  "Contains Excessive Bacteria" if the bottled water                                        
fails to meet the requirements of paragraph (b)(2) of this                                          
section.                                                                                            
     (2)  "Excessively Turbid", "Abnormal Color", and/or                                            
"Abnormal Odor" if the bottled water fails to meet the                                              
requirements of paragraph (b)(3)(i), (ii), or (iii),                                                
respectively, of this section.                                                                      
     (3)  "Contains Excessive _______________," with the blank                                      
filled in with the name of the chemical for which a maximum                                         
contaminant level in paragraph (b)(4) of this section is exceeded                                   
(e.g., "Contains Excessive Arsenic," "Contains Excessive                                            
Trihalomethanes") except that "Contains Excessive Chemical                                          
Substances" may be used if the bottled water is not mineral                                         
water.                                                                                              
     (4)  "Excessively Radioactive" if the bottled water fails to                                   
meet the requirements of paragraph (b)(5) of this section.                                          
     (d)  Adulteration.  Bottled water containing a substance at                                    
a level considered injurious to health under section 402(a)(1) of                                   
the act is deemed to be adulterated, regardless of whether or not                                   
the water bears a label statement of substandard quality                                            
prescribed by paragraph (c) of this section.                                                        
           PART 184--DIRECT FOOD SUBSTANCES AFFIRMED                                                
                AS GENERALLY RECOGNIZED AS SAFE                                                     
                                                                                                    
     7.  The authority citation for 21 CFR part 184 continues to                                    
read as follows:                                                                                    
     AUTHORITY:  Secs. 201, 402, 409, 701 of the Federal Food,                                      
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 342, 348, 371).                                              
     8.  Section 184.1563 is amended by revising paragraph (c) to                                   
read as follows:                                                                                    
 184.1563  Ozone.                                                                                  
     *         *         *         *         *                                                      
     (c)  In accordance with  184.1(b)(2), the ingredient is                                       
used to treat food only within the following specific                                               
limitations:                                                                                       
                             Maximum                                                                
  Category of food       treatment level in       Functional use                                    
                              food                                                                  
                                                                                                    
Bottled water that       Not to exceed            Antimicrobial                                     
  prior to ozonation      current good             agent,  170.3                                   
  meets the               manufacturing            (o)(2) of this                                   
  microbiological,        practice.                chapter.                                         
  physical,               Current good                                                              
  chemical, and           manufacturing                                                             
  radiological            practice results                                                          
  quality standards       in a maximum                                                              
  of  165.110(b)(2)      residual level at                                                         
  through (b)(5) of       the time of                                                               
  this chapter.           bottling of 0.4                                                           
                          milligram of                                                              
                          ozone per liter                                                           
                          of bottled water.                                                         
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
Dated:                         .                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
[BILLING CODE 4160-01-F|                                                                            
