Title: Landmarks in Victims' Rights & Services
Series: Resource Guide
Author: Office for Victims of Crime
Published: March 2002
Subject: victims -- general, crime victims' rights week, victims' rights,
victim services, National Crime Victims' Rights Week
15 pages
36,864 bytes

-------------------------------

Landmarks in Victims' Rights & Services

-------------------------------

The whole history of the progress of human liberty shows that all
concessions yet made to her August claims have been born of earnest
struggle. ... If there is no struggle, there is no progress.

--Frederick Douglass

1965 

o The first crime victim compensation program is established in
California. 
o  By 1970, five additional compensation programs are established--New
York, Hawaii, Massachusetts, Maryland and the Virgin Islands. 

1972 

o The first three victim assistance programs are established: Aid for
Victims of Crime in St. Louis, Missouri; Bay Area Women Against Rape
in San Francisco, California; and the Rape Crisis Center in Washington,
D.C. 

1974 

o The Federal Law Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA) funds
the first victim/witness programs in the Brooklyn and Milwaukee District
Attorneys' offices, plus seven others through a grant to the National
District Attorneys Association, to create model programs of assistance for
victims, encourage victim cooperation, and improve prosecution. 
o The first law enforcement-based victim assistance programs are
established in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and Indianapolis, Indiana. 
o Congress passes the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act which
establishes the National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect (NCCAN).
The new Center creates an information clearinghouse, provides technical
assistance and model programs. 

1975 

o The first "Victims' Rights Week" is organized by the Philadelphia
District Attorney. 
o Citizen activists unite to expand victim services and increase recognition
of victims' rights through the formation of the National Organization for
Victim Assistance (NOVA). 

1976

o Nebraska becomes the first state to abolish the marital rape exemption. 
o The first national conference on battered women is sponsored by the
Milwaukee Task Force on Women in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. 
o In Fresno County, California, Chief Probation Officer James Rowland
creates the first victim impact statement to provide the judiciary with an
objective inventory of victim injuries and losses prior to sentencing. 
o Women's Advocates in St. Paul, Minnesota, starts the first hotline for
battered women.
o Women's Advocates and Haven House in Pasadena, California,
establish the first shelters for battered women. 

1977 

o The National Association of Crime Victim Compensation Boards is
established by the existing 22 compensation programs to promote the
creation of a nationwide network of compensation programs. 
o Oregon becomes the first state to enact mandatory arrest in domestic
violence cases. 

1978 

o The National Coalition Against Sexual Assault is formed to combat
sexual violence and promote services for rape victims. 
o The National Coalition Against Domestic Violence is organized as a
voice for the battered women's movement on a national level, and initiates
the introduction of the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act in
the U.S. Congress. 
o Parents of Murdered Children (POMC), a self-help support group, is
founded in Cincinnati, Ohio. 
o Minnesota becomes the first state to allow probable cause (warrantless)
arrest in cases of domestic assault, regardless of whether a protection
order had been issued. 

1979 

o Frank G. Carrington, considered by many to be "the father of the
victims' rights movement," founds the Crime Victims' Legal Advocacy
Institute, Inc., to promote the rights of crime victims in the civil and
criminal justice systems. The nonprofit organization was renamed
VALOR, the Victims' Assistance Legal Organization, Inc., in 1981. 
o The Office on Domestic Violence is established in the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, but is later closed in 1981. 
o Congress fails to enact the Federal Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration (LEAA), and federal funding for victims' programs is
phased out. Many grassroots and "system-based" programs close. 

1980 

o Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) is founded after the death of
13-year-old Cari Lightner, who was killed by a repeat offender drunk 
driver. The first two MADD chapters are created in Sacramento,
California, and Annapolis, Maryland. 
o The U.S. Congress passes the Parental Kidnapping Prevention Act of
1980. 
o Wisconsin passes the first "Crime Victims' Bill of Rights." 
o The First National Day of Unity in October is established by NCADV
to mourn battered women who have died, celebrate women who have
survived the violence, and honor all who have worked to defeat domestic
violence. This Day becomes Domestic Violence Awareness Week and, in
1987, expands to a month of awareness activities each October. 
o The first Victim Impact Panel is sponsored by Remove Intoxicated
Drivers (RID) in Oswego County, New York. 

1981 

o Ronald Reagan becomes the first President to proclaim "Crime
Victims' Rights Week" in April. 
o The disappearance and murder of missing child Adam Walsh prompt a
national campaign to raise public awareness about child abduction and
enact laws to better protect children. 

1982 

o In a Rose Garden ceremony, President Reagan appoints the Task Force
on Victims of Crime, which holds public hearings in six cities across the
nation to create a greatly needed national focus on the needs of crime
victims. The Task Force Final Report offers 68 recommendations that
become the framework for the advancement of new programs and
policies. Its final recommendation, to amend the Sixth Amendment of the
U.S. Constitution to guarantee that ". . . the victim, in every criminal
prosecution, shall have the right to be present and to be heard at all critical
stages of judicial proceedings . . .," becomes a vital source of new energy
pushing toward the successful efforts to secure state constitutional
amendments through the 1980s and beyond. 
o The Federal Victim and Witness Protection Act of 1982 brings "fair
treatment standards" to victims and witnesses in the federal criminal
justice system. 
o California voters overwhelmingly pass Proposition 8, which guarantees
restitution and other statutory reforms to crime victims. 
o The passage of the Missing Children's Act of 1982 helps parents
guarantee that identifying information about their missing child is
promptly entered into the FBI National Crime Information Center
computer system. 
o The first Victim Impact Panel sponsored by MADD, which educates
drunk drivers about the devastating impact of their criminal acts, is
organized in Rutland, Massachusetts. 

1983 

o The Office for Victims of Crime (OVC) is created by the U.S.
Department of Justice within the Office of Justice Programs to implement
recommendations from the President's Task Force on Victims of Crime.
OVC establishes a national resource center, trains professionals, and
develops model legislation to protect victims' rights.
o The U.S. Attorney General establishes a Task Force on Family
Violence, which holds six public hearings across the United States. 
o The U.S. Attorney General issues guidelines for federal victim and 
witness assistance. 
o In April, President Reagan honors crime victims in a White House
Rose Garden ceremony. 
o President Reagan proclaims the first National Missing Children's Day in
observance of the disappearance of missing child Etan Patz. 
o The International Association of Chiefs of Police Board of Governors
adopts a Crime Victims' Bill of Rights and establishes a victims' rights
committee to bring about renewed emphasis on the needs of crime victims
by law enforcement officials nationwide.

1984

o The passage of the Victims Of Crime Act (VOCA) establishes the Crime
Victims Fund, made up of federal criminal fines, penalties and bond
forfeitures, to support state victim compensation and local victim service
programs. 
o President Reagan signs the Justice Assistance Act, which establishes a
financial assistance program for state and local government and funds 200
new victim service programs. 
o The National Minimum Drinking Age Act of 1984 is enacted, providing
strong incentives to states without "21" laws to raise the minimum age for
drinking, saving thousands of young lives in years to come. 
o The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children is created as
the national resource agency for missing children. Passage of the Missing
Children's Assistance Act provides a Congressional mandate for the
Center. 
o The Spiritual Dimension in Victim Services is founded to involve the
faith community in violence prevention and victim assistance. 
o The U.S. Congress passes the Family Violence Prevention and
Services Act, which earmarks federal funding for programs serving
victims of domestic violence. 
o Concerns of Police Survivors (COPS) is organized at the first police
survivors' seminar held in Washington, D.C., by 110 relatives of officers
killed in the line of duty. 
o A victim/witness notification system is established within the Federal
Bureau of Prisons. The Office for Victims of Crime hosts the first national
symposium on child molestation. 
o Victim/witness coordinator positions are established in the U.S.
Attorneys' offices within the U.S. Department of Justice. 
o California State University-Fresno initiates the first Victim Services
Certificate Program offered for academic credit by a university. 
o Remove Intoxicated Drivers (RID) calls for a comprehensive Sane
National Alcohol Policy (SNAP) to curb aggressive promotions aimed at
youth. 

1985 

o The Crime Victims Fund deposits total $68 million. 
o The National Center for Victims of Crime (formerly the National Victim
Center) is founded to promote the rights and needs of crime victims, and
to educate Americans about the devastating effect of crime on our society. 
o The United Nations General Assembly passes the International
Declaration on the Rights of Victims of Crime and the Abuse of Power. 
o President Reagan announces a Child Safety Partnership with 26
private-sector members to promote child safety, to clarify information
about child victimization, and to increase public awareness of child abuse. 
o The U.S. Surgeon General issues a report identifying domestic violence
as a major public health problem. 

1986 

o The Office for Victims of Crime awards the first grants to support state
victim compensation and assistance programs. 
o Two years after its passage, the Victims of Crime Act is amended by
the Children's Justice Act to provide funds specifically for the
investigation and prosecution of child abuse. 
o Rhode Island passes a constitutional amendment granting victims the
right to restitution, to submit victim impact statements, and to be treated
with dignity and respect. 
o Victim compensation programs have been established in 35 states. 
o MADD's "Red Ribbon Campaign" enlists motorists to display a red 
ribbon on their automobiles, pledging to drive safe and sober during the
holidays. This national public awareness effort has since become an 
annual campaign. 

1987

o Security on Campus, Inc. (SOC) is established by Howard and Connie
Clery, following the tragic robbery, rape and murder of their daughter
Jeanne at Lehigh University in Pennsylvania. SOC raises national
awareness about the hidden epidemic of violence on our nation's
campuses. 
o The American Correctional Association establishes a Task Force on
Victims of Crime. 
o The National Coalition Against Domestic Violence establishes the first
national toll-free domestic violence hotline. 
o Victim advocates in Florida, frustrated by five years of inaction on a
proposed constitutional amendment by their legislature, begin a petition
drive. Thousands of citizens sign petitions supporting constitutional
protection for victims' rights. The Florida legislature reconsiders, and the
constitutional amendment appears on the 1988 ballot.

1988

o OVC establishes funds for the Victim Assistance in Indian Country
(VAIC) grant program to provide direct services to Native Americans by
establishing "on-reservation" victim assistance programs in Indian
Country. 
o The National Aging Resource Center on Elder Abuse (NARCEA) is
established in a cooperative agreement among the American Public
Welfare Association, the National Association of State Units on Aging,
and the University of Delaware. Renamed the National Center on Elder
Abuse, it continues to provide information and statistics. 
o State v. Ciskie is the first case to allow the use of expert testimony to
explain the behavior and mental state of an adult rape victim. The
testimony is used to show why a victim of repeated physical and sexual
assaults by her intimate partner would not immediately call the police or
take action. The jury convicts the defendant on four counts of rape. 
o The Federal Drunk Driving Prevention Act is passed, and states raise the
minimum drinking age to 21. 
o Constitutional amendments are introduced in Arizona, California,
Connecticut, Delaware, Michigan, South Carolina and Washington.
Florida's amendment is placed on the November ballot, where it passes
with 90 percent of the vote. Michigan's constitutional amendment passes
with over 80 percent of the vote. 
o VOCA amendments legislatively establish the Office for Victims of
Crime, elevate the position of Director by making Senate confirmation
necessary for appointment, and induce state compensation programs to
cover victims of domestic violence, homicide and drunk driving. In
addition, VOCA amendments added a new "priority" category of funding
victim assistance programs at the behest of MADD and POMC for
"previously underserved victims of crime." 
o OVC also establishes a Federal Emergency Fund for victims in the
federal criminal justice system. 

1989

o The legislatures in Texas and Washington pass victims' rights
constitutional amendments, which are both ratified by voters the same
year. 

1990 

o The Crime Victims Fund deposits total over $146 million. 
o Congress passes the Hate Crime Statistics Act requiring the U.S.
Attorney General to collect data of incidence of certain crimes motivated
by prejudice based on race, religion, sexual orientation or ethnicity. 
o The Student Right-to-Know and Campus Security Act, requiring
institutions of higher education to disclose murder, rape, robbery and
other crimes on campus, is signed into law by President Bush. 
o The Victims of Child Abuse Act of 1990, which features reforms to
make the federal criminal justice system less traumatic for child victims
and witnesses, is passed by Congress. 
o The Victims' Rights and Restitution Act of 1990 incorporates a Bill of
Rights for federal crime victims and codifies services that should be
available to victims of crime. 
o Congress passes legislation proposed by MADD to prevent drunk
drivers and other offenders from filing bankruptcy to avoid paying
criminal restitution or civil fines.
o The Arizona petition drive to place the victims' rights constitutional
amendment on the ballot succeeds, and it is ratified by voters. 
o The first National Incidence Study on Missing, Abducted, Runaway
and Throwaway Children in America shows that over one million children
fall victim to abduction annually. 
o The National Child Search Assistance Act requires law enforcement to
enter reports of missing children and unidentified persons in the FBI
National Crime Information Center computer system. 

1991 

o U.S. Representative Ilena Ros-Lehtinen (R-FL) files the first
Congressional Joint Resolution to place victims' rights in the U.S.
Constitution. 
o California State University-Fresno approves the first bachelors degree
program in victimology in the nation. 
o The results of the first national public opinion poll to examine citizens'
attitudes about violence and victimization, America Speaks Out, are
released by the National Center for Victims of Crime (formerly the
National Victim Center) during National Crime Victims' Rights Week. 
o The 1991 Attorney General Guidelines for Victim and Witness
Assistance implement new protections of the Crime Control Act of 1990,
integrating the requirements of the Federal Crime Victims' Bill of Rights,
the Victims of Child Abuse Act and the Victim and Witness Protection 
Act of 1982. 
o The American Probation and Parole Association (APPA) establishes a
Victim Issues Committee to examine victims' issues and concerns related
to community corrections.
o The International Parental Child Kidnapping Act makes the act of
unlawfully removing a child outside the United States a federal felony. 
o The New Jersey legislature passes a victims' rights constitutional
amendment, which is ratified by voters in November. 
o Colorado legislators introduce a constitutional amendment on the first
day of National Crime Victims' Rights Week. Fifteen days later, the bill is
unanimously passed by both Houses to be placed on the ballot in 1992. 
o In an 8 to 0 decision, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Simon &
Schuster v. New York Crime Victims Board that New York's
notoriety-for-profit statute was overly broad and, in the final analysis,
unconstitutional. Notoriety-for-profit statutes had been passed by many
states at this time to prevent convicted criminals from profiting from the
proceeds of depictions of their crime in the media or publications. States
must now review their existing statutes to come into compliance with the
Supreme Court's decision. 

1992 


o Rape in America: A Report to the Nation, published during National
Crime Victims' Rights Week by the National Crime Victims Research and
Treatment Center and the National Center for Victims of Crime, clarifies
the scope and devastating effect of rape in this nation, including the fact
that 683,000 women are raped annually in the United States. 
o The Association of Paroling Authorities, International establishes a
Victim Issues Committee to examine victims' needs, rights and services in
parole processes. 
o Congress reauthorizes the Higher Education Bill which includes the
Campus Sexual Assault Victims' Bill of Rights. 
o The Battered Women's Testimony Act, which urges states to accept
expert testimony in criminal cases involving battered women, is passed by
Congress and signed into law by President Bush. 
o In a unanimous decision, the U.S. Supreme Court--in R.A.V. vs. City
of St. Paul--struck down a local hate crimes ordinance in Minnesota,
which prohibited the display of a symbol which one knew or has reason to
know "arouses anger, alarm or resentment in others on the basis of race,
color, creed, religion or gender," which was found to violate the first
amendment.
o Five states--Colorado, Kansas, Illinois, Missouri and New Mexico--
ratify constitutional amendments for victims' rights. 
o Twenty-eight states pass anti-stalking legislation. 
o Massachusetts passes a landmark bill creating a statewide computerized
domestic violence registry and requires judges to check the registry when
handling such cases.  

1993 

o Wisconsin ratifies its constitutional amendment for victims' rights,
bringing the total number of states with these amendments to 14. 
o President Clinton signs the "Brady Bill" requiring a waiting period for
the purchase of handguns. 
o Congress passes the Child Sexual Abuse Registry Act, establishing a
national repository for information on child sex offenders. 
o Twenty-two states pass stalking statutes, bringing the total number of
states with anti-stalking laws to 50, plus the District of Columbia. 

1994

o The American Correctional Association Victims Committee publishes
the landmark Report and Recommendations on Victims of Juvenile Crime,
which offers guidelines for improving victims' rights and services when
the offender is a juvenile. 
o Six additional states pass constitutional amendments for victims'
rights--the largest number ever in a single year--bringing the total number
of states with amendments to 20. States with new amendments include
Alabama, Alaska, Idaho, Maryland, Ohio, and Utah. 
o President Clinton signs a comprehensive package of federal victims'
rights legislation as part of the Violent Crime Control and Law
Enforcement Act. The Act includes: 
--Violence Against Women Act, which authorizes more than $1 billion in
funding for programs to combat violence against women. 
--Enhanced VOCA funding provisions. 
--Establishment of a National Child Sex Offender Registry. 
--Enhanced sentences for drunk drivers with child passengers. 
o Kentucky becomes the first state to institute automated telephone voice
notification to crime victims of their offender's status and release date. 
o OVC establishes the Community Crisis Response (CCR) program to
improve services to victims of violent crimes in communities that have
experienced crimes resulting in multiple victimizations. 

1995 

o The Crime Victims Fund deposits total $233 million. 
o Legislatures in three states--Indiana, Nebraska, and North Carolina--pass
constitutional amendments that will be placed on the ballot in 1996. 
o The National Victims' Constitutional Amendment Network proposes
the first draft of language for a federal constitutional amendment for
victims' rights. 
o The National Victim Assistance Academy in Washington, D.C.,
graduates its first class. Supported by the Office for Victims of Crime, the 
university-based Academy provides an academically credited 45-hour 
curriculum on victimology, victims' rights and myriad other topics. 

1996 

o Federal Victims' Rights Constitutional Amendments are introduced in
both houses of Congress with bi-partisan support. 
o Both presidential candidates and the Attorney General endorse the
concept of a Victims' Rights Constitutional Amendment. 
o The Crime Victims Fund reaches an historic high with deposits over
$525 million.
o Eight states ratify the passage of constitutional amendments for victims'
rights--raising the total number of state constitutional amendments to 29
nationwide. 
o The Community Notification Act, known as "Megan's Law," provides
for notifying communities of the location of convicted sex offenders by
amendment to the national Child Sexual Abuse Registry legislation. 
o President Clinton signs the Anti-terrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act, providing one million dollars in funding to strengthen anti-terrorism
efforts, making restitution mandatory in violent crime cases, and
expanding the compensation and assistance services for victims of
terrorism both at home and abroad, including victims in the military. 
o The Mandatory Victims' Restitution Act, enacted as Title II of the
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, allows federal courts to
award "public harm" restitution directly to state VOCA victim assistance
programs. As a result of the new sentencing guidelines, judges can require
federal offenders in certain drug offense cases to pay "community
restitution."
o The National Domestic Violence Hotline is established to provide
crisis intervention information and referrals to victims of domestic
violence and their friends and family. 
o The Church Arson Prevention Act is signed into law in July, in
response to increasing numbers of acts of arson against religious
institutions around the country. 
o The Drug-Induced Rape Prevention Act is enacted to address the
emerging issue of the use of sedating drugs by rapists on victims. 
o The Office for Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP),
within the U.S. Department of Justice, issues the Juvenile Justice Action
Plan that includes recommendations for victims' rights and services for
victims of juvenile offenders within the juvenile justice system. 
o President Clinton directs the Attorney General to hold the federal
system to a higher standard of services for crime victims. 

1997 

o In January, a federal victims' rights constitutional amendment is
re-introduced in the opening days of the 105th Congress with strong
bipartisan support. 
o In March, Congress passes the Victims Rights Clarification Act of
1997 to clarify existing federal law allowing victims to attend a trial and
to appear as "impact witnesses" during the sentencing phase of both
capital and non-capital cases. Supported by the Justice Department,
President Clinton immediately signs the Act, allowing the victims and
survivors of the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in
Oklahoma City to both observe the trial that is scheduled to begin within
days and to provide input later at sentencing. 
o In April, the Senate Judiciary Committee conducts hearings on the
proposed federal constitutional amendment. While not endorsing specific
language, Attorney General Janet Reno testifies in support of federal
constitutional rights for crime victims. 
o In June, President Clinton reaffirms his support of federal constitutional
rights for crime victims in a Rose Garden ceremony attended by members
of Congress, criminal justice officials, and local, state, and national
victims' rights organizations. Also that month, the Judiciary Committee in
the U.S. House of Representatives conducts its first hearing on the
proposed amendment. 
o In July, the Crime Victims Assistance Act is introduced into the U.S.
Senate, offering full-scale reform of federal rules and federal law to
establish stronger rights and protections for victims of federal crime. This
legislation further proposes to assist victims of state crime through the
infusion of additional resources to make the criminal justice system more
supportive of crime victims. 
o To fully recognize the sovereignty of Indian Nations, OVC for the first
time provides victim assistance grants in Indian Country directly to the
tribes. 
o A federal anti-stalking law is enacted by Congress. 
o The Federal Crime Victims Fund reaches its second highest year in 
fund collections with deposits totaling $363 million. 
o OVC representatives join the United States Delegation to the United
Nations Commission on Criminal Justice and Crime Prevention. OVC
plays a leadership role in the development of an International Victim
Assistance Training Manual to implement the U.N. Declaration of Basic
Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power. 
o The National Center for Victims of Crime, using its extensive
legislative database, creates the Legislative Sourcebook, a comprehensive
compendium of victims' rights laws in all states. Developed with support
from OVC, the Sourcebook becomes the definitive digest of state
legislation on crime victims' rights laws for the nation. 
o OVC releases New Directions from the Field: Victims Rights and
Services for the 21st Century, which assesses the nation's progress in
meeting the recommendations set forth in the Final Report of the 1982
President's Task Force on Victims of Crime, and issues over 250 new
recommendations from the field for the next millennium. 

1998 

o Senate Joint Resolution 44, a new version of the federal Victims' Rights
Amendment, is introduced in the Senate by Senators Jon Kyl (R-AZ) and
Dianne Feinstein (D-CA). The Senate Judiciary Committee subsequently
approves SJR 44 by an 11-6 vote. No further action is taken on SJR 44
during the 105th Congress. 
o Four new states pass state victims' rights constitutional amendments:
Louisiana by a voter margin of approval of 69 percent; Mississippi by 93
percent; Montana by 71 percent; and Tennessee by 89 percent. The
Supreme Court of Oregon overturns the Oregon state victims' rights
amendment, originally passed in 1996, citing structural deficiencies. 
o The Higher Education Amendments of 1998, is passed. Part E of this
legislation, "Grants to Combat Violent Crimes Against Women on
Campus," is authorized through the year 2003, and appropriates a total of
$10 million in grant funding to the Violence Against Women Grants
Office for fiscal year 1999. Another primary aim of this legislation is to
reduce binge drinking and illegal alcohol consumption on college
campuses. 
o The Child Protection and Sexual Predator Punishment Act of 1998 is
enacted, providing for numerous sentencing enhancements and other
initiatives addressing sex crimes against children, including crimes
facilitated by the use of interstate facilities and the Internet. 
o The Crime Victims with Disabilities Act of 1998 is passed, representing
the first effort to systematically gather information on the extent of the
problem of victimization of individuals with disabilities. This legislation
directs the Attorney General to conduct a study on crimes against
individuals with developmental disabilities within 18 months. In addition,
the Bureau of Justice Statistics must include statistics on the nature of
crimes against individuals with developmental disabilities and victim
characteristics in its annual National Crime Victimization Survey by 2000. 
o The Identity Theft and Deterrence Act of 1998 outlawing identify theft
is signed into law. This landmark federal legislation directs the U.S.
Sentencing Commission to consider various factors in determining
penalties including the number of victims and the value of the loss to any
individual victim. The Act further authorizes the Federal Trade
Commission to log and acknowledge reports of identity theft, provide
information to victims, and refer complaints to appropriate consumer
reporting and law enforcement agencies.

1999 

o On January 19, 1999, the Federal Victims' Rights Constitutional
Amendment (Senate Joint Resolution 3, identical to SJR 44) is introduced
before the 106th Congress. 
o The Victim Restitution Enforcement Act of 1999, sponsored by Senator
Abraham Spencer (R-MI) and introduced in the Senate Judiciary
Committee on January 19, 1999, is officially titled a Bill to Control Crime
by Requiring Mandatory Victim Restitution. Components of the proposed
bill include establishment of procedures regarding the court's ascertaining
of the victim's losses; requirement that restitution to victims be ordered in
the full amount of their losses without consideration of the defendant's
economic circumstances; and authorization of the court, upon application
of the United States, to enter a restraining order or injunction, require the
execution of a satisfactory performance bond, or take any other action
necessary to preserve the availability of property or assets necessary to
satisfy the criminal restitution order. 
o Senator Joseph Biden (D-DE) introduces the Violence Against Women
Act II, a bill that extends and strengthens the original 1994 Violence
Against Women Act. Key provisions of this bill would: (1) strengthen
enforcement of "stay away" orders across state lines; (2) boost spending
for more women's shelters; (3) end insurance discrimination against
battered women; (4) extend the Family and Medical Leave Act to cover
court appearances by battered women; and (5) target the "date rape drug,"
Rohypnol, with maximum federal penalties. 
o The National Crime Victim Bar Association is formed by the National
Center for Victims of Crime to promote civil justice for victims of crime.

2000 

o The National Crime Victimization Survey victimization rates for 1999
are released, showing the lowest recorded crime rates since the survey's
creation in 1973. 
o In April 2000, the Federal Victims' Rights Constitutional Amendment
(SJR 3) is addressed for the first time by the full U.S. Senate. On April 27,
2000, following two-and-a-half days of debate, SJR 3 is withdrawn for 
further consideration by its co-sponsors, Senators Kyl (R-AZ) and
Feinstein (D-CA), when it becomes apparent that the measure would not
receive a two-thirds majority vote for approval. 
o Congress passes a new national drunk driving limit of 0.08 blood
alcohol concentration (BAC) with the strong support of Mothers Against
Drunk Driving and other victim advocacy organizations, as well as
leading highway safety, health, medical, law enforcement, and insurance
groups. The new law, which passed with strong bipartisan support,
requires the states to pass 0.08 "per se intoxication" laws or lose a portion
of their annual federal highway funding. 
o The Violence Against Women Act of 2000 is signed into law by
President Clinton, extending VAWA through 2005, and authorizing
funding at $3.3 billion over the five-year period. Among its numerous
provisions, VAWA II: authorizes $80 million a year for rape prevention
and education grants; expands federal stalking statute to include stalking
on the Internet; authorizes $875 million over five years for battered
women's shelters; authorizes $25 million in 2001 for transitional housing
programs; and provides funding totaling $25 million to address violence
against older women and women with disabilities. 
o The Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 is enacted, to prevent
and prosecute the trafficking of persons and provide protection and
assistance for the victims of trafficking. 

2001

o The National Crime Victimization Survey results for 2000 are released,
showing that victimization rates continue to drop, reaching a new low of
25.9 million victims. 
o Regulations for victims of trafficking are adopted, providing a
wholesale change in the way the federal government responded to a class
of crime victims, affecting policies and procedures at the State
Department, the Department of Health and Human Services, and several
Department of Justice agencies, including the FBI, the Immigration and
Naturalization Service, and the U.S. attorneys offices.
o Congress responds to the terrorism acts of September 11 with a raft of
legislation, providing funding for victim assistance, tax relief for victims,
and other accommodations and protections for victims. A new federal
compensation program specifically for the victims of September 11 was
created as part of the Air Transportation Safety and System Stabilization
Act. The program included many types of damages normally available
only through civil actions, such as payment for pain and suffering,
lifetime lost earnings, and loss of enjoyment of life. Claimants must waive
their right to bring a civil action for damages suffered as a result of the
terrorist acts. 
o As part of a package of anti-terrorism legislation called the USA
PATRIOT ACT of 2001, changes are made to the Victims of Crime Act
(VOCA),including increasing the percentage of state compensation
payments reimbursable by the federal government, and allowing OVC to
fund compliance and evaluation projects. 

Compiled by the National Center for Victims of Crime with the support
and assistance of the U.S. Department of Justice Office for Victims of
Crime, Victims' Assistance Legal Organization, Inc.(VALOR), and the
many national, state and local victim service providers who offered
documentation of their key victims' rights landmark activities.

