
   RALPH DAVIS, ET AL., APPELLANTS V. GREGORY SCOTT SCHERER

   No. 83-490

   In the Supreme Court of the United States

   October Term, 1983

   On Appeal from the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh
Circuit

   Brief for the United States as Amicus Curiae Supporting Reversal

            TABLE OF CONTENTS
   Interest of the United States
   Statement
   Introduction and summary of argument
   Argument
      A public official is entitled to qualified immunity
      from a constitutional damages suit unless he has
      violated a "clearly established" constitutional right
      A. The objective qualified immunity test formulated
          by the Court in constitutional damages actions focuses
          on the violation of constitutional, not statutory or
          regulatory, rights
      B. Abrogation of qualified immunity in constitutional
          damages actions on the basis of a statutory or
          regulatory violation is inconsistent with the
          rationale of Harlow v. Fitzgerald
      C. Abrogation of qualified immunity in constitutional
          damages actions because of a regulatory or statutory
          violation would unjustifiably deter the vigorous
          performance of important governmental functions
   Conclusion

                          QUESTIONS PRESENTED

   The United States will address the following question:

   Whether the violation of an administrative regulation abrogates a
government official's qualified immunity from a constitutional damages
suit, even though such conduct did not violate any clearly established
constitutional right of the plaintiff.

   This case presents an important question regarding the scope of the
qualified immunity generally accorded public officials in litigation
brought under 42 U.S.C. 1983 and Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Agents,
403 U.S. 388 (1971).  The district court, in a decision that was
summarily affirmed by the court of appeals (J.S. App. 85a-86a),
concluded that, even though appellant state officials did not violate
any clearly established due process right of appellee in terminating
his employment, they must nevertheless respond in damages because of
their failure to comply with state regulatory guidelines applicable to
the discharge (J.S. App. 70a).  Because the decision below imposes
monetary liability upon appellants without a showing that they
violated appellee's clearly established constitutional rights, it
represents a substantial restriction of the qualified immunity that
this Court has previously conferred upon public officials in
constitutional damages actions.

   Although this case involves the immunity of state officials under
42 U.S.C. 1983, the immunity principles developed by the Court here
will be generally applicable to Bivens actions brought against federal
officials directly under the Constitution.  Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457
U.S. 800, 818 n.30 (1982).  Therefore, the question whether regulatory
violations divest state officials of qualified immunity in a
constitutional damages action brought under 42 U.S.C. 1983 is of
substantial concern to the United States.

                               STATEMENT

   Appellee Gregory Scott Scherer is a former member of the Florida
Highway Patrol (J.S. App. 3a).  In October 1977 the Highway Patrol
discharged him, without affording him formal pre-termination notice or
opportunity to complain, for failure to obey orders to give up a
second job (id. at 7a-10a).  Appellee pursued a grievance through the
Florida civil service system but, on the eve of his civil service
hearing in August 1978, he reached an agreement with the Highway
Patrol providing reinstatement with partial back pay (id. at 10a-14a).
 Some months later, he resigned from the Highway Patrol to take
another job (id. at 22a-23a).

   Appellee then instituted this suit for damages under 42 U.S.C. 1983
against appellants Ralph Davis and J.E. Beach, the two Highway Patrol
supervisors who had approved his 1977 dismissal (J.S. App. 4a).  /1/
Appellee claimed that his 1977 termination did not comport with the
procedural due process requirements of the Fourteenth Amendment (id.
at 1a-2a).  On July 15, 1981, the district court entered a memorandum
opinion in which it concluded that appellee's due process rights had
been infringed (id. at 30a-39a) /2/ and that appellants were not
entitled to qualified immunity because appellee's constitutional right
to "pretermination procedures was clearly established" at the time of
his discharge (id. at 45a).  The court therefore awarded appellee
$4,200 "in compensatory damages for his mental and physical pain and
suffering" (id. at 51a).  /3/

   Five days after the entry of the district court's July 15 order,
the Fifth Circuit decided Weisbrod v. Donigan, 651 F.2d 334, 336
(1981), which held that Florida officials "did not act in disregard of
any well-settled constitutional rights" in discharging a permanent
state employee in 1978 without a pre-termination conference.  On
motion for reconsideration, the district court concluded that Weisbrod
required it to vacate its prior determination that appellants had
terminated appellee in 1977 in violation of his clearly established
due process rights (J.S. App. 66a-67a).  The court nevertheless
concluded that appellants were not entitled to qualified immunity
because their actions contravened the provisions of a newly adopted
Highway Patrol personnel regulation that required a "complete
investigation" into charged instances of misconduct prior to the
termination of a departmental employee (id. at 69a).  /4/ On the basis
of this administrative defect, the court held that appellants "are not
entitled to qualified immunity because their belief in the legality of
the challenged conduct was unreasonable" (id. at 70a).  The court
explicitly recognized that appellee "is not entitled to recover
damages based on the theory" that appellants violated his "clearly
established due process" rights, but it concluded that "he may recover
compensatory damages for (appellants') failure to comply with the
department's procedures in regard to his dismissal" (id. at 71a).  The
court therefore reaffirmed its $4,200 award of compensatory damages,
emphasizing that, if the departmental order violated by appellants
"had not been adopted just prior to (appellee's) dismissal, no damages
of any kind could be awarded" (id. at 70a).

   The court of appeals affirmed "on the basis of the Memorandum and
Opinion of the district judge" (J.S. App. 83a-84a).  /5/

                 INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

   This Court's decisions regarding the scope of official immunity
from damages actions brought under 42 U.S.C. 1983 and Bivens v. Six
Unknown Named Agents, 403 U.S. 388 (1971), reflect "an attempt to
balance competing values:  not only the importance of a damages remedy
to protect the rights of citizens, * * * but also 'the need to protect
officials who are required to exercise their discretion and the
related public interest in encouraging the vigorous exercise of
official authority'" (Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 807 (1982),
quoting Butz v. Economou, 438 U.S. 478, 504-505, 506 (1978)).  The
tension between these "competing values" has been resolved by
according most public officers "qualified immunity" from
constitutional damages actions arising out of the performance of their
official duties.  /6/ Although the exact parameters of this "qualified
immunity" remained unclear for a time (see, e.g., Scheuer v. Rhodes,
416 U.S. 232, 249 (1974)), it is now settled that public officials are
immune from claims for monetary damages unless they violate "clearly
established statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable
person would have known." Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. at 818.  See
also Procunier v. Navarette, 434 U.S. 555, 565 (1978);  Wood v.
Strickland, 420 U.S. 308, 322 (1975).

   In this case, appellee entered federal court with a claim that
appellants had violated his Fourteenth Amendment right to procedural
due process by terminating his employment without notice and a
hearing.  Although the district court ultimately concluded that
appellee's constitutional right to such procedures was not clearly
established at the time of his dismissal, it nevertheless held that
appellants were not entitled to qualified immunity because appellee's
termination did not comply with the dictates of an applicable Highway
Patrol personnel regulation (J.S. App. 71a).  Because, in its view,
appellants' failure to follow a state departmental regulation was
"unreasonable" (id. at 70a), the court awarded appellee damages for
the "mental and physical pain and suffering" (id. at 81a) caused by
appellants' conduct.

   The decision of the courts below has some surface appeal.  By
making a public official's eligibility for qualified immunity depend
upon whether his conduct was "reasonable" in all the circumstances,
the decision undoubtedly furthers the public interest in compensating
aggrieved citizens and deterring official misconduct.  The lower
courts, however, did not consider whether such an expansion of
liability for constitutional torts would "dampen the ardor of all but
the most resolute, or the most irresponsible (public officials) in the
unflinching discharge of their duties.'" Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457
U.S. at 814 (quoting Gregoire v. Biddle, 177 F.2d 579, 581 (2d Cir.
1949), cert. denied, 339 U.S. 949 (1950)).  The decision below fails
to recognize that the "resolution of immunity questions inherently
requires a balance between the evils inevitable in any available
alternative." Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. at 813-814.  By making
the availability of qualified immunity turn on compliance with state
administrative procedure, rather than on the observance of clearly
established constitutional rights, the lower courts have dramatically
and erroneously altered the liability/immunity balance so recently
struck in Harlow.

   The approach of the lower courts is misguided for several reasons.
First, the prior decisions of this Court hold that under the
now-prevailing objective qualified immunity test, an official is
entitled to immunity in a constitutional damages action unless he
disregards the "clearly established" constitutional rights of the
plaintiff;  here, appellants did not violate any clearly established
due process right of appellee.  Second, the lower courts' rationale
threatens to undermine the Court's recent reformulation of the
qualified immunity standard.  In Harlow, the Court foreclosed any
inquiry into the subjective "good faith" of a public official in order
to "permit '(i)nsubstantial lawsuits (to) be quickly terminated'" (457
U.S. at 814 (quoting Butz v. Economou, 438 U.S. at 507-508)).  Under
the approach embraced below, and contrary to what Harlow sought to
accomplish, the immunity of public officials will become less certain
and predictable -- and more difficult to establish in dispositive
pre-trial motions -- as courts delve into the nature, extent and
possible justifications for statutory or regulatory lapses by
defendant officials.  Finally, the decision below will unjustifiably
deter vigorous decisionmaking by public officers and discourage
legislatures and other regulatory bodies from enacting prophylatic
measures to channel official conduct.

                               ARGUMENT

 A PUBLIC OFFICIAL IS ENTITLED TO QUALIFIED IMMUNITY FROM A
CONSTITUTIONAL DAMAGES SUIT UNLESS HE HAS VIOLATED A "CLEARLY
ESTABLISHED" CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT

 A. The Objective Qualified Immunity Test Formulated By The Court In
Constitutional Damages Actions Focuses On The Violation Of
Constitutional, Not Statutory Or Regulatory, Rights

   This Court's decisions evidence significant evolution in the
concept of official qualified immunity.  Beginning from generalized
notions of good faith (Pierson v. Ray, 386 U.S. 547, 555-557 (1967)),
the doctrine of qualified immunity developed subjective and objective
components (Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. at 322), and most recently
has been reformulated as an entirely objective test (Harlow v.
Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. at 818).  Although a public official's claim to
qualified immunity in a constitutional damages action previously
encompassed a wide-ranging consideration of the legal and factual
circumstances surrounding the alleged official misconduct, invocation
of qualified immunity now raises a single, strictly legal issue:
whether the plaintiff has alleged the violation of a clearly
established constitutional right of which a reasonable public official
would have known.

   Here, it is undisputed that appellants did not violate any clearly
established constitutional norm in dismissing appellee from his job
with the Florida Highway Patrol.  Indeed, at the time appellants
acted, they had no reason to know that their conduct transgressed
constitutionally mandated concepts of due process.  In these
circumstances, the lower courts erred in rejecting appellants' defense
of qualified immunity.

   1. This Court's modern qualified immunity jurisprudence begins with
Pierson v. Ray, supra.  There, without using the term "qualified
immunity," the Court held that the traditional "good faith and
probable cause" defense available to police officers in arrest cases
at common law remained available in constitutional suits under 42
U.S.C. 1983 (386 U.S. at 555-557).  The defense would apply where "the
officers reasonably believed in good faith that the arrest was
constitutional, * * * even though the arrest was in fact
unconstitutional" (id. at 557).  Although the Court suggested that
police officers would not be immune from suit if they acted in
subjective bad faith (ibid.), the Court stressed that this "good
faith" immunity had an objective component.  Police officers could be
liable only if they violated established constitutional rights:  "a
police officer is not charged with predicting the future course of
constitutional law" (ibid.).

   In the mid-1970s the Court issues a series of decisions applying
the "good faith" defense, now called "qualified immunity," to a
variety of constitutional damages claims against state officials under
42 U.S.C. 1983.  Scheuer v. Rhodes, supra, was a Section 1983 suit
against the Governor of Ohio and others arising out of a
much-publicized shooting incident at Kent State University.  Although
the procedural posture of the case gave the Court "no occasion for a
definitive exploration of the scope of (qualified) immunity" (416 U.S.
at 249), /7/ the Court nevertheless held that Pierson's interlocking
requirements of subjective good faith and objective reasonableness
provided the appropriate immunity inquiry in constitutional damages
cases.  416 U.S. at 244-248.  /8/

   A year later, Wood v. Strickland, supra, squarely applied the
Pierson test to a Section 1983 action based on an alleged denial of
procedural due process.  In Wood the Court expressly established a
two-part qualified immunity test that turned upon subjective intent as
well as the objective reasonableness of the public official's conduct.
 According to Wood, a school board member would be immune from
students' constitutional suits unless he acted with "an impermissible
motivation or with such disregard of the student's clearly established
constitutional rights that his action cannot reasonably be
characterized as being in good faith" (420 U.S. at 322).  Procunier v.
Navarette, 434 U.S. at 561-562, applied the same test to a damages
suit based on a constitutional controversy over state prisoners'
mailing privileges.  Both Wood and Navarette, however, emphasized the
objective prong of this two-part test;  the Court reiterated in each
case that an official cannot be expected to predict "the future course
of constitutional law." 420 U.S. at 322;  434 U.S. at 562.

   In 1978, this Court held that, in general, federal officials sued
directly under the Constitution would receive the same immunity as
state officials sued under Section 1983.  Butz v. Economou, supra.
The Court kept the subjective and objective components of the
qualified immunity doctrine intact (438 U.S. at 507), but expressed
its expectation that qualified immunity, coupled with the "firm
application of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure," would permit the
speedy resolution of "insubstantial lawsuits" (438 U.S. at 507-508).
See also Hanrahan v. Hampton, 446 U.S. 754, 764-765 (1980) (Powell,
J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).

   The history leads to Harlow v. Fitzgerald.  Despite the Court's
expressed desire in Butz that governmental officials not be "harassed
by frivolous lawsuits" (438 U.S. at 508), it had become apparent that
the "impermissible motivation" or "bad faith" component of the
qualified immunity test prevented summary disposition of many, if not
most, meritless constitutional damages claims (Harlow, 457 U.S. at
815-816).  Because an "official's subjective good faith has been
considered to be a question of fact" (457 U.S. at 816), and Fed. R.
Civ. P. 56 does not permit summary disposition of disputed questions
of fact, the invocation of official qualified immunity rarely
prevented a trial;  plaintiffs could almost always raise a factual
issue regarding the defendant's "good faith." The Court noted in
addition that "substantial costs attend the litigation of the
subjective good faith of government officials" (457 U.S. at 816).
These costs include "distraction of officials from their governmental
duties, inhibition of discretionary action, and deterrence of able
people from public service" (ibid.).

   The Court, therefore, reassessed the "balanc(e) of competing
values" that undergirded its prior qualified immunity cases and
reformulated the concept of official qualified immunity (457 U.S. at
816).  As a result, the subjective "good faith" component of qualified
immunity was abandoned in favor of a purely objective test:  officials
performing discretionary functions would henceforth be shielded from
liability in constitutional damages actions unless their conduct
violated "clearly established" constitutional rights (457 U.S. at
818).

   The Court's reformulation of the controlling legal test
significantly increased the effectiveness of the protections afforded
by official qualified immunity.  This fact is evidenced by comparing
that immunity after Harlow with this Court's description of qualified
immunity in Imbler v. Pachtman, supra.  There, the Court noted
"important" procedural differences between qualified and absolute
immunity:  while "absolute immunity defeats a suit at the outset, * *
* (t)he fate of an official with qualified immunity depends upon the
circumstances and motivations of his actions, as established by the
evidence at trial" (424 U.S. at 419 n.13 (citing Scheuer v. Rhodes,
416 U.S. at 238-239;  Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. at 320-322)).  This
comparison of absolute and qualified immunity, undoubtedly correct
when rendered, is no longer apt -- Harlow explicitly restructured the
qualified immunity test to permit the defeat of a suit without the
necessity of presenting evidence at trial.  /9/ The Court achieved
this result, moreover, without departing from the historical roots of
qualified immunity doctrine.  The objective test demands respect for
"basic, unquestioned constitutional rights" (Wood v. Strickland, 420
U.S. at 322) while ensuring that public officials will not be "charged
with predicting the future course of constitutional law" (Pierson v.
Ray, 386 U.S. at 557).

   2. Application of the above principles to the facts of this case
would seem to require reversal of the lower courts without further
discussion.  It is undisputed that appellants did not violate any
clearly established due process right of appellee (see J.S. App.
66a-67a).  Hence, appellants are immune from a suit resting on due
process grounds.

   In an effort to avoid this result, however, appellee has seized
upon the statement in Harlow that a government official will lose his
qualified immunity if he violates a "clearly established staturory or
constitutional right()" (457 U.S. at 818) (emphasis added).  Appellee
contends (Mot. to Dis. or Aff. 21-26) that this statement supports the
district court's conclusion that the violation of a statutory or
regulatory provision precludes a public official from claiming
qualified immunity from constitutional damages, even where the
constitutional right violated by the official was not clearly
established" at the time he acted.  /10/ But, aside from its
unexplained use of the term "statutory * * * rights" (457 U.S. at
818), Harlow contains no support for the decision below.  On the
contrary, a careful reading of Harlow indicates that the Court
intended no change in the objective component of the qualified
immunity test, which since the time of Pierson v. Ray has focused
exclusively on whether an official had reason to believe that his
conduct was unconstitutional.  /11/ Several factors dictate this
conclusion.

   First, the reference in Harlow to "clearly established statutory *
* * rights" (457 U.S. at 818) seems no more than an acknowledgment
that the plaintiff in Harlow was seeking damages on statutory as well
as constitutional theories (457 U.S. at 820 n.36).  /12/ Given the
statutory allegations in Harlow, and in the absence of any explanation
from this Court, it is fair to conclude that the "statutory" component
of the Harlow test comes into play only where, as in Harlow itself and
as may occur with some frequency in suits against state officials
under 42 U.S.C. 1983 (see Maine v. Thiboutot, 448 U.S. 1 (1980)),
plaintiffs seek damages from public officials for violation of
statutory rights.  /13/ However, where a plaintiff seeks damages for
violation of his constitutional rights, the immunity inquiry should
focus on whether those rights were clearly established.  /14/

   Second, the Court in Harlow cited two cases in support of its
reformulation of the qualified immunity test (457 U.S. at 818):
Procunier v. Navarette, supra, and Wood v. Strickland, supra.  Those
cases, however, considered only whether officials had violated
"clearly established constitutional rights," and did not suggest a
further, statutory inquiry.  Indeed, in Navarette, the prisoner
plaintiffs claimed that the prison authorities had suppressed mail in
knowing disregard" of "applicable statewide prisoner mail
regulations." 434 U.S. at 557.  The Court, despite some expressed
concern regarding this allegation (434 U.S. at 570-571) (Stevens, J.,
dissenting), granted the defendants qualified immunity as a matter of
law, finding that "there was no estabished First Amendment right
protecting the mailing privileges of state prisoners and that hence
there was no such federal right about which (defendants) should have
known." 434 U.S. at 562-563.  The current case is no different from
Navarette.  It is difficult to understand why the present appellants'
alleged violation of state regulations should divest them of qualified
immunity in a constitutional suit, while the claimed regulatory
violations in Navarette were of no consequence.

   Finally, Harlow -- like all the other qualified immunity cases
decided by this Court -- reiterated that a prime purpose of the
objective test is to ensure that public officials not be required to
anticipate as yet undeclared constitutional rights.  457 U.S. at 819
n.33.  Yet that is precisely what would occur if, as held by the
courts below, an official's compliance with relevant statutes and
regulations became the inquiry in constitutional damages suits.  Under
that view of qualified immunity, an official could be held personally
liable in damages even where the constitutional right he violated was
not "clearly established" when he acted.  It seems unlikely that
Harlow silently created such an anomaly.  /15/

 B. Abrogation Of Qualified Immunity In Constitutional Damages Actions
On The Basis Of A Statutory Or Regulatory Violation Is Inconsistent
With The Rationale Of Harlow v. Fitzgerald

   In Harlow, the Court steered a careful path between the competing
interests at stake whenever a claim of official immunity is raised.
The Court sought to provide a "realistic avenue for vindication of
constitutional guarantees," without unduly diverting "official energy
from pressing public issues" (457 U.S. at 814).  The objective
qualified immunity test forged by the Court achieves these goals:  it
imposes liability where the alleged constitutional wrong is clearly
established" (457 U.S. at 818), while at the same time permitting
"'(i) nsubstantial lawsuits (to) be quickly terminated'" on the basis
of legal motions without the necessity of trial (457 U.S. at 814,
quoting Butz, 438 U.S. at 507-508).  The approach taken by the courts
below, however, seriously disrupts this careful balance.

   The district court's reasoning in denying appellants' qualified
immunity claim is somewhat opaque.  /16/ The district court apparently
assumed that defendants in constitutional damages actions are not
entitled to official immunity if their conduct was in any way
"unreasonable," and that a court should consider the "totality of the
circumstances" in making that determination (J.S. App. 68a).  Applying
that analysis to this case, the court concluded that appellants were
not entitled to immunity because, in light of the Highway Patrol
regulation, "their belief in the legality of the challenged conduct
was unreasonable" (id. at 70a).  Thus, even though appellants were not
aware that their dismissal of appellee violated constitutional
standards, and even though the district court twice found that
appellants had not acted maliciously or in bad faith (id. at 46a,
70a), the court stripped them of qualified immunity because of its
determination that "unreasonable" officials should not be able to take
advantage of what traditionally has been considered a "good faith"
defense.

   The district court's reasoning may have made some sense before this
Court's decision in Harlow, but it obviously is no longer good law.
/17/ Prior to Harlow, a public official's compliance with applicable
statutory or regulatory proscriptions was perhaps relevant to the
question of the official's subjective good faith.  The violation of a
statute or regulation may have provided some evidence that the
official had "acted with such an impermissible motivation * * * that
his action cannot reasonably be characterized as being in good faith"
(Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. at 322).  /18/ Harlow, however,
explicitly foreclosed any inquiry into the subjective motivation
behind alleged official misconduct, so that "bare allegations of
malice (would) not suffice to subject government officials either to
the costs of trial or to the burdens of broad-reaching discovery" (457
U.S. at 817-818).

   It could be argued, of course, that a limited reintroduction of the
subjective element of the qualified immunity defense, to the extent of
inquiring into whether the defendant has acted in "bad faith" by
violating a statutory or regulatory provision, would raise none of the
concerns about protracted evidentiary proceedings that prompted the
Court's decision in Harlow.  But, despite its surface appeal, that
argument is incorrect.  Although it may appear otherwise at first
blush, the mere violation of a statute or regulation provides little
objective indication that a public official has acted with an
"impermissible motivation" toward a particular plaintiff.  Rather,
consideration of statutory or regulatory violations in the immunity
context would necessarily require extensive analysis of the state of
mind of the offending public official, the nature of the legal
proscription transgressed, the blame to be attached to such a
shortcoming, and all possible justifications for the official action.
In short, the approach of the district court would rapidly create the
difficulties that the Court's reformulation of qualified immunity in
Harlow was designed to avoid.

   1. As a matter of logic, the failure to abide by a statute or
regulation cannot demonstrate an "impermissible motivation" unless the
offending public official knows he is acting in violation of a
particular legal proscription.  If a state social service worker were
to deny a plaintiff welfare benefits in intentional disregard of
well-established state procedural regulations, a court might
understandably question the good faith of the defendant in a
constitutional damages action brought under 42 U.S.C. 1983 and the
Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause.  However, where the
procedural lapse is unknowing or inadvertent, the moral culpability of
the public official is considerably less.  Actions taken in ignorance
of statutory or regulatory provisions, while possibly negligent, can
hardly be ascribed to a malicious intent to harm a particular person
or be considered the equivalent of the "impermissible motivation" held
in Wood v. Strickland, supra, to abrogate the pre-Harlow qualified
immunity defense.  Thus, actions taken without actual knowledge of a
legal proscription do not provide substantial objective evidence of
bad faith.  It would not be appropriate, in such circumstances, to
strip a public official of qualified immunity from a constitutional
damages claim.  Courts, therefore, would necessarily have to determine
the state of mind of the defendant official before dissolving his
official immunity on the ground of a statutory or regulatory lapse,
and the violation itself would not be dispositive on that issue.  /19/

   Not only does a statutory or regulatory violation lack, by itself,
any necessary indication of the bad faith of the defendant public
official, such a violation may also be irrelevant to the wrong for
which the plaintiff seeks redress.  It would make little sense to
conclude that the violation of any statute or regulation demonstrates
that the erring public official acted with an "impermissible
motivation" toward the plaintiff, regardless of the nature of the
provision involved.  If a particular statute or regulation is not
"intended primarily to confer important procedural (or substantive)
benefits" upon the plaintiff (American Farm Lines v. Black Ball
Freight Service, 397 U.S. 532, 538 (1970)), its violation should have
no impact on the defendant's claim of immunity.  A policeman who does
not comply with a departmental regulation regarding the use of sirens
in residential areas while rushing to a robbery should not be deprived
of official immunity in a constitutional damages action arising from
his arrest of the robber.  Nor should an Internal Revenue Service
employee have to fear that the failure to prepare an audit
"classification checksheet," as required by office procedures, will
subject him to personal liability should a court conclude that the
audit itself transgressed some newly declared principle of
constitutional law.  See II Audit, (CCH) Internal Revenue Manual
Section 4138.6 (1983).

   Furthermore, not every statute or regulation is of equal dignity,
and not every statutory or regulatory violation is subject to equal
opprobrium.  The violation of a personnel regulation designed to
provide an employee with seven days' notice prior to a termination
hearing clearly has more relevance to a constitutional damages action
seeking reparation for a due process violation than does the failure
to prepare the notice itself in triplicate, as may be required by
another administrative provision.  By the same token, failure to meet
the seven-day notification deadline by 24 hours is surely less
probative of "impermissible motivation" than is failure to comply with
the notification procedures at all.  And even a complete failure to
follow the notification procedures might be excusable because of,
inter alia, erroneous reliance on an exception to the procedures for
"good cause," or the advice of departmental counsel that the
procedures are inapplicable, or the direction of a superior officer
that the procedures should be disregarded, or an honest, albeit
mistaken, belief that strict adherence to the procedures would be
inappropriate in a given situation.  /20/

   Thus, the mere fact that a public official has violated a legally
imposed duty is insufficient "objective" evidence, standing alone, to
justify the imposition of damages liability;  a court faced with such
a violation would necessarily have to consider -- and likely hear
evidence on -- whether a particular regulation or statute is
"important," or whether a particular violation is insubstantial or
otherwise justifiable.  Violation of a statute or regulation, in
short, is not an infallible "litmus test" for bad faith or
unreasonable conduct.  /21/

   2. The above considerations demonstrate that, far from providing
"objective" evidence of "impermissible motivation," injection of
statutory or regulatory violations into constitutional damages actions
would merely open the door to a host of fact-bound disputes, thereby
frustrating Harlow's intent to facilitate dispositive pretrial
qualified immunity motions (457 U.S. at 815-818).  If this Court were
to conclude that a statutory or regulatory violation is relevant to a
public official's qualified immunity, trial courts would be forced to
inquire whether the violation was knowing, whether the transgressed
provision confers any rights on the plaintiff, and whether the alleged
error was -- on the particular facts of the case -- insubstantial or
otherwise justifiable.  /22/ There would be "no clear end to the
relevant evidence" (id. at 817).  And if the Harlow "objective" test
for qualified immunity in constitutional cases routinely were to
require an inquiry into statutory and regulatory violations, there
would appear to be no reason not to consider violations of other legal
or ethical obligations as well, such as common law or contract
obligations, or the various professional codes that govern the conduct
of certain public officials.  See, e.g., Model Rules of Professional
Conduct (1983);  1 Criminal Justice Standards chs. 3 & 4 (1980)
(Standards Relating to the Prosecution Function and the Defense
Function).  Indeed, if the idea is to match perfectly the qualified
immunity defense with public officials whose actions are "legal" or
"reasonable" in every respect, the Court might as well resurrect the
subjective "good faith" standard it discarded in Harlow.

   In Harlow, however, this Court determined that, except perhaps
where there is a right to statutory damages, only egregious
constitutional violations preclude a public official from claiming
qualified immunity.  That standard on rare occasion may exculpate
public officials who act maliciously, but it is necessary to prevent
harassment of officials by insubstantial damages claims.  As Judge
Learned Hand suggested many years ago, official immunity is a price
society willingly pays to avoid including diligent public servants
among those exposed to trial and liability.  Gregoire v. Biddle, 177
F.2d at 581.

   In sum, the consequences of narrowing qualified immunity to those
who can satisfy a judge or jury that their conduct was legally valid
in every particular would be severe.  Public officials would no longer
enjoy a predictable or certain immunity standard, and Harlow's
expectation of expeditious handling of constitutional tort claims
would be defeated in many situations.  /23/ This Court should adhere
to its established standard that, in constitutional suits, public
officials are immune unless they violate "clearly established
constitutional rights." That standard both serves the needs of
effective government and ensures compensation to victims of blatantly
unconstitutional conduct.

 C. Abrogation Of Qualified Immunity In Constitutional Damages Actions
Because Of A Regulatory Or Statutory Violation Would Unjustifiably
Deter the Vigorous Performance Of Important Governmental Functions

   As the courts and commentators have recognized, any immunity for
public officials that is less than absolute is likely to have a
serious, negative impact on decisionmaking.  See Nixon v. Fitzgerald,
457 U.S. 731, 753 (1982);  Stump v. Sparkman, 435 U.S. 349, 355-356
(1978);  P. Schuck, Suing Government 59-81 (1983);  Cass, Damage Suits
Against Public Officers, 129 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1110 (1981).  /24/ The
Court has nevertheless concluded that victims of deliberate
constitutional misconduct should receive compensation, both out of
fairness to the victims and out of a desire to deter egregious misuse
of governmental power.  See Butz v. Economou, 438 U.S. 504-508.  The
device of qualified immunity, in this Court's judgment, tolerably
balances the needs of effective government and compensation of the
victims of official wrongdoing.  That balance would tilt sharply
against effective government, however, if public officials were held
accountable in constitutional damages actions not only for
indifference to "clearly established constitutional rights," but also
for statutory and regulatory violations that are later determined to
amount to a constitutional wrong.  Such a rule would unduly chill
competent and capable decisionmaking and would create a strong
incentive for legislative and regulatory bodies not to enact
prophylactic measures that go beyond current constitutional
boundaries.

   1. It is a fairly easy matter, as this Court well knows, to allege
violations of open-ended constitutional provisions like the Due
Process and Equal Protection Clauses.  In recent times, for example,
this Court has addressed whether matters as mundane as the negligent
loss of prisoners' personal property (Parratt v. Taylor, 451 U.S. 527
(1981)), public employees' hair length (Kelley v. Johnson, 425 U.S.
238 (1976)), access by minors to coin-operated amusement devices (City
of Mesquite v. Aladdin's Castle, Inc., 455 U.S. 283 (1982)), and local
rock music concerts (City of Newport v. Fact Concerts, Inc., 453 U.S.
247 (1981)) implicate constitutional concerns.  As the Court has
remarked, a public official's risk of tort liability under Section
1983 "cover(s) a large range of activity in everyday life." City of
Newport v. Fact Concerts, Inc., 453 U.S. at 270.

   Virtually any action taken by a public official, therefore, can
result in a constitutional damages suit.  A public official may
overcome his apprehension of constitutional suits, however, and
continue to serve the public in a vigorous and unintimidated manner,
if he knows that he is at financial risk only if he defies a clearly
established constitutional standard -- a "basic, unquestioned
constitutional right()" (Wood v. Strickland, 420 U.S. at 322).  But if
the official's personal liability extends to all instances where a
court, sifting through the myriad statutes or regulations that may
apply to his conduct, declares after the fact that a particular action
transgressed not only a statute or regulation but also a newly
declared constitutional right, the threat to effective government will
increase markedly.

   The approach taken by the district court is unduly disruptive of
vigorous official decisionmaking because of the stiff penalty it
exacts for a statutory or regulatory violation that, by itself, may
not encompass a damages remedy.  Regulatory bodies routinely impress a
range of substantive and procedural proscriptions on government
functionaries, thereby determining both the scope of discretion
available to public officials and the consequences attending official
misconduct.  However, in imposing constitutional damages liability on
appellants because of their purported regulatory lapse, /25/ the
district court did not consider whether, in promulgating its personnel
regulation, the Florida Highway Patrol intended either to require that
the mandated procedures occur in some formal sequence /26/ or to
impose stiff monetary fines upon erring officials.  The Highway Patrol
may well have intended that any transgression of the regulation be
remedied through the state civil service appeals system and be
deterred or punished by internal sanctions.  But henceforth, the
regulation involved in this case -- as well as other, certainly more
innocuous Highway Patrol regulations -- will attain a sanctity clearly
not foreseen by those who promulgated it.  Appellants and other
officers, with one eye on their pocketbooks and the other eye on
administrative guidelines, will walk wide of the mark set in any
departmental regulation, whether or not the State of Florida or the
Highway Patrol sought to enforce such exacting conduct.

   The abrogation of qualified immunity in a constitutional damages
action on the basis of statutory or regulatory violations thus would
compel government decisionmakers to hew much closer to the "regulatory
or statutory line" -- and accordingly would deter much more conduct,
including perfectly lawful conduct -- than the enacting lawmakers may
ever have intended.  Such a result rests on less than firm legal
ground, /27/ and is certainly unwise as a matter of sound governmental
policy.

   Of course, even under appellee's reading of Harlow, post facto
constitutional liability presumably would result only where a public
official has violated a "clear" statute or regulation.  But that
condition offers little comfort, for public employees operate under a
plethora of statutes, rules, and regulations that later may seem
"clear" to judges or juries, but rarely are so clear in the heat of an
emergency or as applied to unanticipated facts.  Furthermore, although
each employee ideally should know and understand the statutes and
regulations bearing upon his performance, attaining such knowledge can
be a formidable task.  See generally any title of the Code of Federal
Regulations;  any issue of the Federal Register.  At bottom,
regardless of an employee's good faith efforts to comply with all
pertinent job standards, what is required for fearless decisionmaking
is confidence that unexpected liability will not occur.  That
confidence cannot be built in the face of the possibility that an
unpredictable confluence of open-ended constitutional provisions and
vague statutory or regulatory requirements will result in ruinuous
personal damages.  /28/

   2. The result below not only will interfere with effective official
action by chilling government decisionmakers, it will also deter
regulatory bodies who oversee official conduct from taking steps to
proscribe and channel potential future misconduct.  If the courts
below are correct that statutory or regulatory requirements that
anticipate later developments in constitutional law give rise to
damages liability when violated, regardless of the intent of the
enacting body, legislatures and government agencies will have a
powerful incentive not to enact protective provisions that go beyond
the current minimum requirements of the Constitution.  Rather than
subject government officials to onerous personal liability for the
violation of provisions foreshadowing constitutional developments,
regulatory bodies may well opt to "have no rules except those mandated
by (the Constitution), or to have them framed in a mere precatory
form." United States v. Caceres, 440 U.S. 741, 756 (1979).

   Such an incentive structure should be avoided.  Statutes and
regulations often provide greater rights than are secured by the
Constitution.  In this case, for example, the Highway Patrol
regulation relied upon by the district court requires a "complete
investigation" into allegations of employee misconduct (J.S. App.
69a).  While such an investigation prior to the termination of an
employee is undoubtedly consonant with sound notions of fair play, we
are unaware of any decision declaring that such a procedure is
required by the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause.  As a
result of the lower court's decision, however, Florida officials may
delete any "complete investigation" requirement from their personnel
regulations because the protection the provision affords government
employees is simply outweighed by the potential personal liability the
requirement creates for executive officials should a court conclude,
sometime in the future, that a "complete investigation" is in fact
required by the Due Process Clause.  Indeed, the decision below has
the perverse result of punishing appellants because they were unlucky
enough to work for a concerned, attentive governmental body;
appellants would be much better off if the Highway Patrol had entirely
disregarded appellee's interests by not mandating any particular
termination procedures.

   This Court, therefore, should reject appellee's reformulation of
the qualified immunity defense because of the inhibiting effect it
would have on the development of regulations and statutes governing
the conduct of public officials.  To paraphrase the Court's reasoning
in United States v. Caceres, 440 U.S. at 755, "(r)egulations governing
the conduct of (public officials) are generally considered desirable,
and may well provide more valuable protection to the public at large
than the deterrence (of official misconduct) flowing from the
occasional (award of damages in a constitutional tort action)."

                              CONCLUSION

   The judgment of the court of appeals on qualified immunity should
be reversed.

   Respectfully submitted.

   REX E. LEE

      Solicitor General

   RICHARD K. WILLARD

      Acting Assistant Attorney General

   KENNETH S. GELLER

      Deputy Solicitor General

   RICHARD G. WILKINS

      Assistant to the Solicitor General

   BARBARA L. HERWIG

   JOHN F. CORDES

      Attorneys

   FEBRUARY 1984

   /1/ The suit also named Chester Blakemore as a defendant in his
official capacity as Director of the State Department of Highway
Safety and Motor Vehicles (J.S. App. 1a).  In addition to damages
under 42 U.S.C. 1983, appellee sought a declaratory judgment pursuant
to 28 U.S.C. 1651, 2201 and 2202 that the Florida statute under which
his civil service claim had been processed was violative of due
process (J.S. App. 2a).  In its initial decision, rendered in July
1981, the district court declared Fla. Stat. Section 110.061 (1977)
unconstitutional on various due process grounds (J.S. App. 50a).  When
the State informed the district court that the statute had been
repealed by the Florida legislature, the court entered an amended
judgment declaring the newly enacted civil service statute
unconstitutional (J.S. App. 80a).  The United States will not address
the propriety of the district court's entry of declaratory relief in
the circumstances of this case.

   /2/ The district court found that appellants had failed to grant
appellee "an effective opportunity to rebut the claim of conflict
(between his two jobs) * * * prior to the termination decision" (J.S.
App. 35a).

   /3/ The district court also initially awarded appellee $5,000 in
exemplary damages because of appellants' purported failure to follow
departmental disciplinary guidelines in firing him (J.A. App. 51a).
On reconsideration, the court vacated this award as "not supported by
the evidence" (id. at 72a).

   /4/ The regulation provides, in pertinent part (J.S. App. 69a):

         Upon receiving a report of * * * a violation of Department or
      Division rules and regulations * * *, the Director shall order a
      complete investigation to determine the true facts concerning
      the circumstances surrounding the alleged offense.  The
      completed investigation report will also contain a written
      statement made by the employee against whom the complaint was
      made.  If after a thorough study of all information concerning
      the violation, the Director decides that a * * * dismissal will
      be in order, he will present the employee in writing with the
      reason or reasons for such actions.

   /5/ Appellants have invoked the Court's appellate jurisdiction
under 28 U.S.C. 1254(2), which permits appeal of any decision of a
court of appeals holding a state statute unconstitutional, but which
restricts review "to the Federal questions presented." Relying upon a
narrow interpretation of Section 1254(2), appellee has argued that the
immunity question addressed by the United States in this brief is not
properly before the Court (Mot. to Dis. or Aff. 26-28).  See also 12
Moore's Federal Practice Paragraph 435.01(2), at 6-55 (2d ed. 1982).
The United States submits that the Court has the authority to reach
and should address the second "federal question" presented by
appellants.

   Although the Court has noted that "statutes authorizing appeals are
to be strictly construed" (Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee Corp., No. 81-2159
(Jan. 11, 1984), slip op. 7), the parameters of an appeal under 28
U.S.C. 1254(2) are not as narrow as appellee suggests.  See 17 Wright,
Miller & Cooper, Federal Practice and Procedure Section 4037, at 40-41
(1978);  Stern & Gressman, Supreme Court Practice 68 (5th ed. 1978).
In construing the parallel provision authorizing appeals from state
courts, 28 U.S.C. 1257, the Court has given its appellate jurisdiction
a considerably broader scope.  See Flournoy v. Wiener, 321 U.S. 253,
263 (1944) ("Appellant having assigned as error the decision of the
Louisiana Supreme Court holding the federal Act invalid, the case is
properly an appeal, and appellant could have included in his
assignments of error any other denial of federal right whether or not
capable in itself of being brought here by appeal").  And, in Leroy v.
Great Western United Corp., 443 U.S. 173 (1979), the Court addressed a
venue issue raised by the appellants without intimating that such a
course of action raised jurisdictional difficulties under 28 U.S.C.
1254(2).  Like the venue issue in Leroy, the qualified immunity issue
presented by appellants is a "federal question" of significant import.
 It is, therefore, within the appellate jurisdiction of the Court.

   /6/ To date, absolute immunity has been accorded only to the
President (Nixon v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 731 (1982)), members of the
judiciary (Stump v. Sparkman, 435 U.S. 349 )1978)), congressmen and
their aides performing legislative functions (Eastland v. United
States Servicemen's Fund, 421 U.S. 491 (1975);  Gravel v. United
States, 408 U.S. 606 (1972)), and prosecutors and administrative
officers engaged in adjudicative or prosecutorial functions (Imbler v.
Pachtman, 424 U.S. 409 (1976);  Butz v. Economou, 438 U.S. at
508-517).

   /7/ The court of appeals had sustained the district court's
dismissal of the complaints in Scheuer on the ground of "absolute
'executive immunity'" (416 U.S. at 238).  After concluding that the
respondents were entitled to qualified rather than absolute immunity,
the Court declined to determine the precise scope of that reduced
immunity from suit (416 U.S. at 249-250).

   /8/ The Court explained in Scheuer that "(i)t is the existence of
reasonable grounds for the belief formed at the time and in light of
all the circumstances, coupled with good faith belief, that affords a
basis for qualified immunity of executive officers for acts performed
in the course of official conduct" (416 U.S. at 247-248).

   /9/ See Czurlanis v. Albanese, 721 F.2d 98, 108 (3d Cir. 1983) ("We
interpret (Harlow) as instructing the lower federal courts that the
issue of qualified immunity would ordinarily be one of law for
determination by the courts");  Zweibon v. Mitchell, 720 F.2d 162, 168
(D.C. Cir. 1983) (following Harlow the invocation of qualified
immunity raises a "purely legal threshold question" because "once the
trial judge determines that the law was not clearly established at the
time the contested conduct occurred, the inquiry ceases");  Windsor v.
The Tennessean, 719 F.2d 155, 165 (6th Cir. 1983), petition for cert.
pending, No. 83-5611 ("The barriers to summary judgment presented by
the discarded mixed objective-subjective test * * * no longer exist;"
Harlow's "purely objective test" is to be applied "as a matter of law
before discovery occurs") (citation omitted);  Stokes v. Delcambre,
710 F.2d 1120, 1125 (5th Cir. 1983) (quoting Trejo v. Perez, 693 F.2d
482, 485 (5th Cir. 1982)) (Harlow establishes a two-level
"progressive" inquiry:  "'(1) Was the law clearly established at the
time?  If the answer to this threshold question is no, the official is
immune.  (2) If the answer is yes, the immunity defense ordinarily
should fail unless the official claims extraordinary circumstances and
can prove that he neither knew nor should have known that his acts
invaded settled legal rights'").

   /10/ This case, of course, does not even involve a "statutory"
right;  appellants have been mulcted in damages for violating a
Highway Patrol personnel regulation.

   /11/ See Zweibon v. Mitchell, 720 F.2d at 172 ("content of the
(Harlow) standard is identical to that for establishing the
'objective' element of the old two-pronged test for qualified
immunity") (emphasis in original).

   /12/ The respondent in Harlow sought damages for the violation of 5
U.S.C. 7211 and 18 U.S.C. 1505.  Although the petitioners urged the
Court "to rule on the legal sufficiency of respondent's 'implied'
causes of action" under those statutes, the Court declined to address
that question, noting that it had taken "jurisdiction of the case only
to resolve the immunity question" (457 U.S. at 820 n.36).  See also
Nixon v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. at 748 n.27 (Court assumes, arguendo, in
a companion case to Harlow "that private causes of action may be
inferred * * * under * * * the two statutes on which respondent
relies").

   /13/ Where a plaintiff seeks recovery for violation of a statutory
right, whether or not the statutory right was "clearly established" at
the time of the alleged violation would, of course, be central to the
defendant official's claim of qualified immunity.

   /14/ See, e.g., Windsor v. The Tennessean, 719 F.2d at 165 ("If the
law which the defendant is alleged to have violated is clearly
established, then the qualified immunity defense should fail")
(emphasis added);  Harris v. Young, 718 F.2d 620, 623 (4th Cir. 1983)
(focus of Harlow is on "'clearly established constitutional rights");
Barnett v. Housing Authority, 707 F.2d 1571, 1582 (11th Cir. 1983
("Harlow directs our attention to the constitutional violation at
issue") (emphasis added);  Johnson ex rel. Johnson v. Brelje, 701 F.2d
1201, 1210 (7th Cir. 1983) (when defendants have not violated clearly
established constitutional right, violation of state law does not
abrogate qualified immunity).

   /15/ Indeed, Justice Brennan's concurring opinion in Harlow
summarized the decision as "imposing liability when a public-official
defendant 'knew or should have known' of the constitutionally
violative effect of his action" (457 U.S. at 820-821) (emphasis
added).  Justice Brennan presumably was discussing the commonplace
constitutional damages suit, such as the present case, rather than the
unusual statutory claims in Harlow that necessitated the "statutory"
corollary to the qualified immunity standard.  See also id. at 821
("the clever and unusually well-informed violator of constitutional
rights will not evade punishment") (emphasis added).

   /16/ The rationale for rejecting appellants' immunity defense is
further clouded by the court of appeals' failure to write an opinion
(J.S. App. 83a-84a).

   /17/ We note that the district court issued its decision on
reconsideration approximately two weeks prior to the decision in
Harlow.

   /18/ Indeed, at least one court suggested, in a case decided
shortly before Harlow, that statutory or regulatory violations were
dispositive of the subjective good faith issue.  See, e.g., Williams
v. Treen, 671 F.2d 892, 899 (5th Cir. 1982), cert. denied, No. 82-281
(Jan. 10, 1983) (violation of state law abrogates qualified immunity
because "(i)f an official's conduct contravenes his own state's
explicitly and clearly established regulations, a subjective belief in
the lawfulness of his action is per se unreasonable").  The First
Circuit, in a case decided after but without citation to or discussion
of Harlow, similarly concluded that the violation of a state
regulation is sufficient to rebut a "defendant's 'good faith'
defense." King v. Higgins, 702 F.2d 18, 21 (1983).  This Court's
rejection of the subjective good faith prong of the qualified immunity
test undercuts the rationale of both Williams and King.  See Saldana
v. Garza, 684 F.2d 1159, 1163 n.15 (5th Cir. 1982) (Harlow "dispensed
with the 'subjective' test of official good faith" upon which Williams
was decided).  See also Johnson ex rel. Johnson v. Brelje, 701 F.2d at
1210 (violation of state law does not abrogate qualified immunity in
constitutional damages action).

   /19/ It is not clear, in this case, whether appellants acted in
violation of a known, well-established procedural regulation.  The
district court noted that the personnel regulation purportedly
transgressed by appellants was adopted "just prior to (appellee's)
dismissal" (J.S. App. 70a).  Moreover, the district court did not make
any finding that appellants were aware of this regulation;  the court
simply asserted that appellants "should be bound by their Department's
own orders" (id. at 70a-71a).  In fact, as noted above, the court
stated on two occasions that it found "no evidence of malicious
intention on the part of" appellants (id. at 46a;  see also id. at
70a).  Any violation of state regulations in this case, therefore,
could well have been unintentional.

   /20/ The evidence in this case showed that appellants "consulted
both the (Highway Patrol's) personnel director and the (Patrol's)
legal counsel before making the final dismissal decision" (J.S. App.
55a).

   /21/ Indeed, in this very case the district court found that,
despite the regulatory violation, appellants "acted with no malicious
intent in their dealings with (appellee)" (J.S. App. 70a).  Appellee
suggests however, that even though the regulatory violation does not
indicate any malicious intent on the part of appellants to harm him,
it nevertheless abrogates appellants' official immunity because it
demonstrates that they "have exceeded their sphere of discretion"
(Mot. to Diss. or Aff. 24).  But this Court has never accepted the
contention that official immunity disappears any time a plaintiff
claims that the defendant has exceeded his authority.  Rather, the
Court has concluded that an official is entitled to raise an immunity
claim so long as the "alleged wrongful acts lay * * * within the outer
perimeter of his authority" (Nixon v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. at 757).
See also Barr v. Matteo, 360 U.S. 564, 575 (1959) (fact "that the
action here taken was within the outer perimeter of petitioner's line
of duty is enough to render the privilege applicable").

   It is undisputed that appellants acted well within their respective
spheres of authority in dismissing appellee;  accordingly, the mere
fact that appellee questions appellants' compliance with a personnel
regulation does not, by itself, destroy their entitlement to qualified
immunity.  Any other rule would subject public officials "to trial on
virtually every allegation that an action was unlawful, or was taken
for a forbidden purpose" (Nixon v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. at 756).

   /22/ The district court did not pause to consider these factors.
Although appellants arguably did not comply formally with the
provisions of the personnel regulation cited by the court, the
district court's own opinion shows that appellants conducted a
thorough investigation into the circumstances surrounding appellee's
dismissal, gave appellee numerous warnings as well as the opportunity
to respond to those warnings in writing, and provided him with written
reasons for his termination (see J.S. App. 6a-9a).  The allegedly
transgressed personnel regulation required little, if any, more (see
id. at 69a).  See also notes 19 & 20, supra.

   /23/ The Court abandoned the "good faith" element of the qualified
immunity defense in Harlow in part because "(i)t is not difficult for
ingenious plaintiff's counsel to create a material issue of fact * * *
where subtle questions of * * * a decisionmaker's mental processes are
involved." 457 U.S. at 817 n.29 (quoting from Halperin v. Kissinger,
606 F.2d 1192, 1214 (D.C. Cir. 1979) (Gesell, J., concurring), aff'd
by an equally divided Court, 452 U.S. 713 (1981)).  The reformulation
of the immunity defense adopted by the courts below similarly would
create an incentive for ingenious plaintiff's counsel to scour the
statute books, regulations, and internal guidelines for the purpose of
alleging that the defendant official's actions were unreasonable.

   /24/ An official inevitably finds "it difficult honestly and
independently" to do his work if he knows "that unfavorable (action),
coupled with an allegation of * * * malice, could subject him to * * *
possible personal liability, as a result of which he might lose his
home, his automobile, his savings and whatever other property, real or
personal, he might possess." Ove Gustavsson Contracting Co. v. Floete,
299 F.2d 655, 658 (2d Cir. 1962), cert. denied, 374 U.S. 827 (1963).
See also Butz v. Economou, 438 U.S. at 526-527 (Rehnquist, J.,
dissenting).

   /25/ There is no question here that, absent appellants' alleged
violation of the state Highway Patrol regulation, they would be immune
from suit;  the district court expressly stated that, without the
state regulation, "no damages of any kind could be awarded" (J.S. App.
70a).

   /26/ The regulation clearly requires an investigation into
allegations of employee misconduct, an opportunity for the
investigated employee to respond in writing, and written reasons for
any termination decision (J.S. App. 69a).  As noted earlier (note 22,
supra), the district court's opinion shows that appellants complied --
at least informally -- with these requirements (J.S. App. 6a-9a).

   /27/ The district court's approach, in effect if not in form,
provides an "implied" damages remedy for the regulatory or statutory
provisions involved in a constitutional damages suit.  See J.S. App.
71a (even though appellee "is not entitled to recover damages based on
the theory that (the due process violation was clearly established),
he may recover compensatory damages for (appellants) failure to comply
with the (Highway Patrol's) procedures in regard to his dismissal").
If the decision below is affirmed, in every case where statutory or
regulatory violations are pertinent to the qualified immunity issue
(i.e., those cases where there was no violation of a "clearly
established constitutional right"), the sine qua non of a damages
recovery will be a showing of a statutory or regulatory violation.
And, although damages formally will be awarded for the
"constitutional" injury, the mechanism in many instances will provide
a ready "end run" around the Court's precedents controlling the
creation of implied statutory damages actions.  See, e.g., Middlesex
County Sewerage Authority v. National Sea Clammers Ass'n, 453 U.S. 1,
13-15, 19-21 (1981).  Cf. Davis V. Passman, 442 U.S. 228, 241 (1979)
(judiciary is "primary means" through which constitutional rights are
enforced, but "(s)tatutory rights and obligations are established by
Congress, and it is entirely appropriate for Congress, in creating
these rights and obligations, to determine in addition who may enforce
them and in what manner").

   /28/ A number of complex statutory and regulatory provisions, many
of which demand the exercise of discretion in interpretation and
enforcement, apply to the actions of public officials.  If the
decision below is not reversed, these provisions will become mine
fields in which such officials will operate at their own risk.  The
Internal Revenue Code, and its implementing regulations, are but one
example of a complex regulatory scheme where an inadvertent misstep by
a government official could result in significant "constitutional"
liability.  See Bothke v. Fluor Engineers & Constructors, Inc., 713
F.2d 1405 (9th Cir. 1983) (court of appeals expresses it view that a
low-level IRS employee is not entitled to qualified immunity from a
constitutional damages suit because she failed to construe a rambling
protect letter, mailed by the plaintiff taxpayer long before the
defendant IRS employee was assigned to collect the plaintiff's
delinquent taxes, as a request for an "abatement" of assessed taxes).
