UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO

      TORONTO, CANADA

           MSS IAl

DEPARTMENT 0~ MATHEMATICS                     August 24, 1987

Some time ago I wrote to about one hundred Nobel Laureates, most of whom
had supported the International Campaigns for Human Rights which I have
been directing, about a purely historical project.

I said that I contemplated publishing a book about the work of Nobel
Laureates and asked for whatever documentation could be spa&&by those
to whom I was writing.  My intention was not to publish a biographical
account of the usual style.  I was thinking of a story about the actual
work of the scientists and scholars, the emphasis being on the problems,
the disappointments, the difficulties , the final success.but above all,
emphasizing the role of hard work.

It was my intention to put out a work that would be inspiring to young
workers.   My own contact with John von Neumann demonstrated to me how much
it means to witness,and work withpa great scientist or scholar.
It was not my plan to do the actual writing.  That was to be done by someone
competent in the area under discussion,and it would be my task to find such
writers.  Undoubtedly more than one book would be involved.
Of course this entire project would be unnecessary if such books had been al-
ready written or were in process of being written.  I therefore asked for
such information as was known about such books.

I am most grateful to many of you who have sent me material, especially
many splendid photographs.   I will see to it that one way or another, all
the material I collect, is disposed of in a way that will be useful to
future historians.

Some of you have sent me copies of the pamphlets written by you and published by
the Nobel Foundation.  These are most welcome.  I have enquired from the
Nobel Foundation and these pamphlets are available in bound volumes but rather
expensive.

With respect to my request that you support the International Campaigns for
Human Rights that I direct, of course I appreciate that in some sense I am
intruding on your privacy.  But it is a realistic fact that famous persons
enjoy popular respect and Nobel Laureates are surely among the most respected
persons.  By speaking out against torture and oppression you strengthen
enormouslythe action of thousands, perhaps millions,of your fellow persons.
The International Campa-igns have this charateristic: they are separated away
from partisan political action,they pursue doggedly one issue at a time, and
the Campaign sticks with the issue until the Campaign is successful.
There are 94 Nobel Laureates who support the present Campaignfor all victims
in Chile(to the list on page+ of enclosed Bulletin add: Robert Schrieffer (USA)*),
If your name is not in the list, it would be welcomed,


1981-1984 : INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN - PROFESSOR J.L. MASSERA (URUGUAY)
1984-1986 : INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN - ORLOV AND SHCHARANSKY (USSR)
1986-1986 : INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN - ORLOV (USSR)
1986-   : INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGN - ALL VICTIMS (CHILE)

c/o Department of Mathematics, University of Toronto
    Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M5S 1Al
      Telephone (416) 978-4156

BULLETIN of March-April 1987
   Revised  August 1987

The objective of this Campaign is to bring to an end all torture, abduction and oppression by agents of the
Pinochet regime in Chile.

This International Campaign is directed by:

Israel Halperin, Fellow of The Royal Society of Canada
   Secretary of the Canadian Committee of Scientists and Scholars
   Former Vice-President of The Canadian Mathematical Society

with the help of a world-wide network of colleagues, who copy and distribute the Bulletins; to mention just one
(as an example), Professor Kenichi Shiraiwa and his group, who translate the Bulletin into Japanese and distri-
bute it throughout Japan.

We thank the many thousands of supporters in many countries whose contributions pay our only expenses (very
high): printing and postage.

The work for these Campaigns, the enormous (and growing) volume of correspondence, are now impossible to
handle without a secretary. We appeal to persons and organizations that value these Campaigns, to contribute
funds that will pay for a secretary: payable to INTERNATIONAL CAMPAIGNS.

Persons and Organizations listed as supporting the Campaign, are not responsible for the material printed in the
Bulletin: they are simply-stating their strong support for the objective of the Campaign.

Our previous Campaigns have been for individual victims: Prof. J.L. Massera in Uruguay, and Dr. Anatoly
Shcharansky and Dr. Yuri Orlov in the USSR. So stron g has become our international support (at the end of
the Orlov Campaign the number of Nobel Lsureatc supporters was 98) t,bat we take on now the problem of all
victims in Chile.


-2-

13 years ago, General Pinochet's men murdered the legally elected President of Chile and the General seized
control of the country, control enforced with the tactics of torture, abduction, and murder of opponents or even
critics. Rick Jackson of the Canadian Labor Congress (Globe and Mail, August 13, 1986) called Pinochet one of
the world's bloodiest dictators.

From the Globe and Mail, Feb. 11, 1987:

A Chilean army officer gave evidence implicating military officials in the 1976 murder in Washington of a lead-
ing Pinochet opponent, former Ambassador from Chile Orlando Letelier.  General Pinochet brushed off this
event by calling the officer a deserter.

From Newsletter Numbers 1 and 2, 1986, Canadian Inter-Church Committee on Human Rights in Latin America:
In December, 1984, A.A.V. Morales of the Chilean Air Force Intelligence Service confirmed the existence of an
`illegal' organization whose job it was to eliminate suspected or known opponents of the regime.

The Horrible Practice of Disappeared-Missing:

Agents of the Pinochet regime, sometimes in uniform, sometimes not, seize a victim, take the victim to a secret
camp (the location is changed frequently), torture the victim and then murder him or her. The Government and
other authorities deny all knowledge of the event and refuse to investigate.  Relatives are left in a state of
unending despair and agony and the entire population is terrorized (those who complain are themselves often
targets of this inhuman practice); sometimes the dead body is found, discarded.

From Amnesty International pamphlet: Chile, September, 1986:
Juan Aguirre Ballesteros went missing on 4 September 1984. On 22 October his headless and mutilated body
was found in a river near Santiago.

In July, 1986, Rodrigo Rojas and Carmen Quintana Aranciaba, university students, were seized by a military
control, beaten, doused with petrol and set on fire. Rojas died in hospital on 5 July, Carmen Quintana came to
Canada, and is in the Hospital Dieu in Montreal, with 80% of her body burned, fighting for her life.

Pinochet commented that they had probably burned themselves accidentally.

Maxim0 Baex Jaramillo was beaten by the police, kicked and thrown into a water canal. Fuente Galdames was
forced to walk over burning types in his bare feet. Luis Caucao Munoz was taken from his home, beaten and
burned. One l&year old girl was put on a police bus and beaten and kicked, later put in a barrel of very cold
water. The Archbishop of Santiago protested "methods used to instill fear and insecurity in the whole commun-
ity, especially the children".

The threat of arrest, abduction, torture and even death is ever present for thousands of Chileans, from church
workers, human right activists, and the urban poor, to members of opposition organizations.

Chilean law contains ample provisions for the protection of the rights to life, freedom from arbitrary detention,
freedom from torture and ill-treatment, and the right to justice. However, in practice, legal safeguards have
been rendered ineffective by emergency laws and outright flouting of procedures.


-3-

Ddegations Visiting Ctide:
The National Academy of Sciences (U.S.A.) sent a delegation, including two Nobel Laureates, to Chile, March
17, 1985. The delegation reported that the Vicaria de la Solidaridad (under the protection of the Archbishop)
documented, in 1983: 69 cases of people who were tortured while detained by the security forces; in 1984: 156
such cases. The most common forms of torture used in Chile, the delegates were told, are beatings on the soles
of the feet, use of an electric prod, and electric torture involving strapping the victim to a metal bed, often with
strips of wet cloth.

The American Committee for Human Rights, the American Psychiatric Association and the American Psycho-
logical Association sent a delegation to Chile on November 35, 1985. They reported "One case involved several
school children who watched the seizure and shooting in their schoolyard of adults? including a parent and a
teacher; those seized were found the next day with their throats slit".

This delegation stated that, based on their own Endings, they believed that torture was used by Chile's military
regime.

Harassment of Doctors in Chile:

On 11 July, 1986, Chilean police arrested and jailed Dr. Juan Luis Gonzalez and Dr. Francisco Rivas, president
and secretary general, respectively, of the Chilean Medical Association. Six weeks before, Gonzalez and Rivas
had accepted the American Association for the Advancement of Science Award for the eirorts of the Chilean
Medical Association to prevent torture in Chile and to halt the complicity of physicians in such torture.

From Frederick If. Lowy, M.D., Dean oj Medicine, University of Toronto, to the American Association For The
Advancement of Science, Jan. 26, 1987:
. ..I have learned that during the past year the President and Secretary of the Chilean Medical Association have
been temporarily imprisoned and harassed . . . . Canadian academik and medical communities vigorously oppose
such abuses of human rights.... Are these colleagues still being harassed?

This international Campaign-Chile will escalate publicity by regular Bulletins in several languages, including
Spanish and Portuguese, and distribute these Bulletins widely in many countries, including Chile.

There are other countries where human right.s are abused, but by focusing world-wide public opinion on this
notorious case, we will make an effective contribution to the struggle to eliminate torture, as slavery and canni-
balism were ehminated long ago from civilized society.


Who supports this International Campaign? Thousands, in many countries. We can name
only a few.  Included are 93 Nobel Laureates (those marked * cosigned the message to
the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations printed on the next page):

Philip Anderson (USA)
Christian Anfinsen (USA)*
Kenneth Arrow (USA)n
Julius Axelrod (USA)"
David Baltimore (USA)*
Sir Derek Barton (USA)*
Baruj Benacerraf (USA)5
Paul Berg (USA)*
Hans Bethe (USA)"
Gerd Binnig (Germany)*
Konrad Bloch (USA)"
Daniel Bovet (Italy):"
Willy Brandt (Germany)
Adolph Butenandt (Germany)*
S. Chandrasekhar (USA)*
Stanley Cohen (USA)*
Leon Cooper (USA)*
Sir John Cornforth (U.K.)*
James Cronin (USA)
Jean Dausset (France)*
Gerard Debreu (USA)"'
Renato Dulbecco (USA);?
Manfred Eigen (Germany)*
Adolf0 Perez Esquivel (ArgentinaIf<
E.G. Fischer (Germany)*
William Fowler (USA)*
Murray Gell-Mann (USA)
Donald Glaser (USA)*
Sheldon Glashow (USA)"
Ragnar Granit (Sweden)fc
Herbert Hauptman (USA)
Dudley Herschbach (USA)fc
Gerhard Herzberg (Canada)<<
Robert Hofstadter (USA)"'
Dorothy Hodgkin (U.K.)$c
Robert Halley (USA)"
David Hubel (USA)fc
Francois Jacob (France)"'
B.D. Josephson (U.K.)"
Jerome Karle (USA)*
Sir Bernard Katz (U.K.)*
Aaron Klug (U.K.)*
Arthur Kornberg (USA)"'
Polycarp Kusch (USA)*
Yuan T. Lee (USA)+
Baruch Blumberg (USA)*
Sir George Porter (U.K.)*

Andre Lwoff (France)!:
Sean MacBride (Ireland)*
A.J.P. Martin (U.K.)*
Sir Peter Medawar (U.K.>*
J.E. Meade (U.K.)*
Simon van der Meer (Switzerland)*
Czeslaw Milosz (USA)"
Cesar Milstein (U.K.)*
Peter Mitchell (U.K.jfc
Francisco Modigliani (USA)"
Sir Nevill Mott (U.K.)*
Daniel Nathans (USA)"
George Palade (USA)*
Linus Pauling (USA)"
Arno Penzias (USA)"
Max Perutz (U.K.)"
John Polanyi (Canada)*
Tadeus Reichstein (Switzerland)*
Carlo Rubbia (USA)+
Ernst Ruska (Germany)*
Abdus Salam (Italy)+<
Frederick Sanger (U.K.)*
Arthur Schawlow (USAl
Julian Schwinger (USA)*
Glenn Seaborg (USA)*
Kai Siegbahn (Sweden)fi
Herbert Simon (USA)"
George Snell (USA)"
Roger Sperry (USA);?
Henry Taube (USA):"
Howard Temin (USA):"
Jan Tinbergen (Netherlandsjk
Nicolaas Tinbergen (U.K.)f:
James Tobin (USA)*
Lord Todd (U.K)*
Charles Townes (USA)*
Desmond Tutu (South Africa)*
George Wald (USA)*
Patrick White (Australia)f<
Elie Wiesel (USA)*
Torsten Wiesel (USA)*
Robert Wilson  USA)"'
An-tony Hewish t U.K. *
Andre Cournand
Paul Samuelson 1 1
             USA *
        USA)*
Louis Neel (France)*


-5-

Message to every member nation of the Human Rights commission
              of the United Nations :

  The inhuman practice of abduction, torture and oppressian in Chile has teen condemned by world-wick
opinion. The Human Righta commission has rebuked the Government of Chile but has failed to take
effective measures to stop the practice.  This failure undermines the credibility d the Commission and
weakens the United Nations. The undersigned Nobel Laureates call on the Commission to take action that
will be effective in stopping torture and oppression in Chile.

This Campaign has the support of (also):
    The Academia Nazionale dei Lincei (Italy)
      Sir Yehudi Menuhin
    Jack Lemmon, actor (star of the movie `Missing')
     Ephriam E;atzir, former President of Israel
     The Federation of Australian University Staff Associations
      Dr. Yuri Orlov

and of (also):
(i) 0rganiZations  The InterChurch Committee on H~u~~q$$,s,s& @$.&&erica(Canada)
  The national Mathematical Socletles of Cana a, Norway,
  The United Steelworkers of America, The Canadian Labor Congress
   The Ontario Federation of Labor
   The Chemical Institute of Canada  National Academies of Science of Bolivia, India
                        The New York Acade "ay of Sciences
  The Social Responsibility and Justice Committee of the Unite  Church of Australia
  International Playwrights, Essayists and Novelists (Canadian Centre)
  Faculty Associations of Canadian Universities: Toronto, Brock, Mount Allison, Western Ontario, Moncton,
  Faculty of Science of the University of Witwatersrand, South Africa            SFU, UBC.
  The Committee of Concerned Scientists (CCS), The Law Union of Ontario
  The Alliance of Canadian Cinema, Television and Radio Artists (ACTRA)
  Actors Equityof New Zealand  The German Physical Society
  The Jesuits of Canada, The Dominican Friars of Toronto
(ii)  Presidents, Vice-Chancellors, Principals, Rectors, Masters of Universities
  P. J. Boyce (Murdoch, Australia)            John Mallea (Brandon, Canada)
  Aldee Cabana (Sherbrooke, Canada)          John Marburger (Stony Brook, USA)
  J.E. Chamberlin (New College, Toronto)        B.C. Matthews (Guelph, Canada)
  Jill Conway (formerly Smith, USA)           Jean-Guy Paquet (Laval, Canada)
  Margaret Fulton (formerly Mt. St. Vincent, Canada)    George Pedersen (Western Ontario, Canada)
  John Godfrey (Icing's College, Halifax)         Jose Pinotti (formerly Campainas, Brazil)
  R.D. Guthrie (NSW Institute of Technology, Australia)  Peter Richardson (University College, Toronto)
  Heith Hancock (Flinders, Australia)          William Saywell (Simon Fraser, Canada)
  Evelyn Handler (Brandeis, USA)

Leslie Harris (formerly Memorial, Newfoundland)

David Smith (Queen's, Canada)
Robert Smith (Western Australia)

Theodore Hesburgh (Notre Dame, USA)        David Strangway (British Columbia, Canada)
Ron Ianni (Windsor, Canada)             Ron Watts (formerly Queen's, Canada)
Paul0 Renato Costa Jonga (Unicamp, Brazil)       Brian Wilson (Queensland, Australia)
Alvin A. Lee (M&laster, Canada)           Douglas Wright (Waterloo, Canada)
MI. Logan (Monash, Australia)
Lord Flowers(University of London, U.K.)   D i Yerbury (Macquarrie, Australia)
Rodolfo J. Pinto de Lue(Santa Catarina,    Walter Pitman (OISE, Canada)
Klaus Ring(J. W. Goethe, Frankfurt)   Brazil) A. LeRoy Greason(Bowdoin, USA)
Jerome k%esner(formerlv M.I.T.)         Brian Segal Ryerson,  Canada
Patrick Kenniff(Conco,r$ia, Canada,)        Jurgen Timm t
                    Donald Wells Mt. Allison,
                  $    1
                   emen Germanzmada)
Richard Cyert(Carnegie-Mellon, USA)      J. Lyons(Trinity Hall, Cambridge, U.K.)
L.P. Blanchard(Moncton)

(continued on next page)


-6-

(ii) Continued: Rectors of Universities in Brazil:

Fund. Univ. Es-tad. Ma,ringa        Univ. Fed. Fluminense
Univ. Fed, Paraiba              Fund. Univ. Blumenau
Fund. Univ. Fed. Mato Gross0     Univ. Estad. Paulista "Julio de Mesquita"
Univ. E&ad. Campinas           Univ. Fed. Uberlandia
Univ. Catolica Goias            Univ. Fed. Rio de Janeiro
Pontif. Univ. Catolica Campinas

(iii) Academicians in many countries, we list those who are Members of
   The Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences:

Prof.Mr. J.A. Ankum
Prof.Dr. J. Arigns Kappers
Prof.Dr. G. Blasse
Prof.Dr. D.P. Blok
Prof.Dr. J. de Boer
Prof.Dr. D. Bootsma
Prof.Dr. P. Borst
Prof.Dr. N.G. de Bruijn
Prof.Dr. J. Bruyn
Prof.Dr. H.M. Buck
Prof.Dr. W.H. van Dobben
Prof.Dr. P.J.D. Drenth
Mr. H. Drion
Prof.Dr. C.W. Drooger
Prof.Dr. H.W. von der Dunk
Prof.Mr. P. van Dijk
Prof.Dr. W.T. van Est
Prof.Dr. N.H. Frijda
Prof.Dr. I. Gadourek
Prof.Dr. P.J. Gaillard
Prof.Dr. H. van Genderen
Prof.Dr. A.D. de Groot
Prof.Mr. P. de Haan
Prof.Dr. P. Hennipman
Prof.Dr. W.K.B. Hofstee
Dr. M.W. Holtrop
Prof.Dr. F.J. van Ingen
Prof.Dr. L. de Jong
Prof.Dr. J. Joosse
Prof.Dr. P. van de Kamp
Prof.Dr. P.W. Klein
Prof.Dr. A.J.F. K6bben
Prof.Dr.Ir. W.T. Koiter
Prof.Dr. J. Kommandeur

Prof.Dr. E.H. Kossmann
Prof.Dr. D.J. Kuenen
Prof.Dr. C.J. Lammers
Mr. G.E. Langemeijer
Prof.Ir. D.G.H. Latzko
Prof.Dr. W.J.M. Levelt
Prof.Dr. H. Linnemann
Prof.Dr. J.H. van Lint
Prof.Dr.Ir. J.P. Mazure
Prof.Dr.Ir. R. Meischke
Prof.Dr. G.R.F.M. Nuchelmans
Prof.Dr. J.H. Oort
Prof.Dr. J.Th.G. Overbeek
Prof.Dr. S.L. Radt
Dr. A.R. Ritsema
Prof.Dr. J.J. van Rood
Prof.Dr. C.J. Ruijgh
Prof.Dr. A. Teeuw
Prof.Dr. E. den Tex
Prof.Dr. J. Tinbergen
Prof.Dr. G.J. de Vries
Prof.Dr. J.H. van der Waals
Prof.Dr. V. Westhoff
Prof.Dr. A.A. Weijnen
Mr. G.J. Wiarda
Prof.Dr. J.T. Wiebes
Prof,Dr. D. de Wied
Prof.Dr. J.C.M. van Winden
Prof.Jhr.Dr. P.J. van Winter
Prof.Dr. P. de Wolff
Prof.Dr.Ir. P.M. de Wolff
Prof.Dr. A.S. van der Woude
Prof.Dr. E. Ziircher


-7-

(iv) Members of l'Acad&mie des Sciences(Frxr (,) and Members Associks

R. D'Aubign:
P. Auger
E. Baulieu
J. Blamont
B. Bleaney
J. Brachet
E. Boureau
H. Car-tan
H. Casimir
R. Castaing
P. Chambon
G. Choquet

Y. Choquet-Bruhat
C. Cohen-Tannoudgi
J. Coulomb
P. Deligne
J. Dieudonne/
J. Doob
C. Dubost
F. Gros
A. Guinier
P. Jacquinet
A. Jost
P. Karli

W. XcLter   J. C. Peckcr
I-1. Lacombe R. Peierls
P. Lacombe J. Roche
Y. Laporte E. Schatzman
E. Lederer L. Schwartz
J. Lehn    P. Slonimski
P. Lepine   K. Thimann
G. Millot   A. Thomas
T. Monod    J. Tits
A. Moyse   V. Weisskopf
G. Ourisson R. Wurmser

(v) Fellows of the Royal Society of Canada, 94, among them:
  Northrop Frye     Margaret Atwood    Marc-Adelard Tremblay
  Guy Rocher         Robert Finch      Robert Haynes
  L.S.Wolfe        Bryce Kendrick      Edith Fowke
  Hon Eugene Forsey   John Meisel        Pierre Bois
  George Connell      Ernest Sirluck     Sydney Friedman
   Louis Siminovitch   Leslie Green     Digby McLaren (Pres. RSC)
(vi) Musicians      Maurice Lebel (former Pres. RSC)

Johl?.:Weinzweig, Harry Freedman, Anton Kuerti, Louis Applebaum,
Maureen Forrester, John Beckwith, Oscar Peterson, Oskar Morawetz,
Leon Pommers

(vii) Writers

   Per Wastberg, Arthur Miller, Timothy Findley, Susan Sontag,
   June Callwood, Marion Andre,  Robert Fulford, Robertson Davies
(viii) Physicists in many countries, among them:
   Kurt Gottfried, Elliot Lieb, John Charap, Herman Feshbach,
   Daniel Kastler, Rudolph Haag, William McGowan, J. Trumper
   Myer Bloom, Paul Kessler, J.P.Mathieu, Ephriam Katzir(former
  President of Israel) Ed&do Amaldi, Rafael Sorkin, Fritz Rohrlich
  S. Frankel, H. Rohreg
(ix) Mathematicians

Fields Medalists: Sir Michael Atiyah, David Mumford,

Stephen Smale, Charles Fefferman, Michael Freedman
Laurent Schwartz

Jacques Dixmier, Dennis Sullivan, Edward Nelson, Robert Edwards,
Hale Trotter, Lipman Bers, Leon Kushner, Ezio Stagnaro, William Parry,
Miles Reid, Jean Louis Verdier, Jean Francois Mela, Robert Anderssen,
Marcos Sebastiani, Udo Simon, Gyorgy Targonski, L. Arnold, Dieter
Kohnlein, Kurt Leichtweiss,  Shokichi Iyanaga, Kenichi Shiraiwa and
23 other senior mathematicians in Japa.n*.,and many others in other
countries1 e.g. M. Kreck, W. Ambrose, B. Monteiro, J. Seade

(x) Fellows of the Australian Academy of Science:
   C.A. Hurst, S.J. Redman, B.G. Hyde, Jacques Miller, Allen Kerr,
   G.M. Kelly, Sir Gustav Nossal.


-8-

(xi) Religious Leaders

Rt. Rev. Paul Moore Jr., Bishop of New York
Most Rev. Michael J. Peers, Primate of the Anglican Church of Canada
Very Rev. Lois Wilson, President of the World Council of Churches
Very Rev. Edward Scott, President of the Canadian Council of Churches
Moderators of the United Church of Canada, present and former:

   Dr. Anne Squire?, Clarke MacDonald, Bruce McLeod, Robert Smith
Rabbi Dow Marmur, Holy Blossom Temple, Toronto
Father William M. Addley, S.J., Provincial Superior, Jesuit Order
Henri Goudreault, O.M.I., Provincial Superior, St. Joseph's Province
Marilyn Matz, F.C.J., Provincial Superior, Faithful Companions of Jesus
R.F. Wooton, Associate Secretary, United Church of Australia

(xii) Mayors of cities

Ron Wallace(Halifax), Robert Morrow(Hamilton, Sylvia Sutherland(Peterborough)
Gordon Campbell(Vancouver), Arthur Eggleton(Toronto),
Manning MacDonald(Sydney)

(xiii) Senators(Canada)

Earl Hastings, John Godfrey, L. Norbert Theriault, David Croll,
Royce Frith, Joan Neiman

(xiv) Members of Parliament(Canada)

Neil Young, Steven Langdon, Hon Warren Allmand, Michael Cassidy,
Bill Blaikie, Hon Charles Caccia, Dan Heap, Sheila Copps, Ernie Epp,
Dr. Maurice Foster, Svend Robinson, Lynn McDonald, John Parry,
Robert Kaplan      

(xv) Members of the Ontario'Legislature
  Susan Fish, Jim Henderson, Ian Scott, Karl Morin-Strom, Richard Allen,
  Dave Cooke, Mike Breaugh, Elinor Caplan, William Wrye, James Foulds,
  Jim McGuigan, Bob Rae, Marian Bryden, C. J. Wildman
(xvi) Many, many other persons and groups, among them:  Hon J.D. Arnup,
  FRS: Charles Hanes, Michael Smith, L. Mestel, John S. Bell, Robert Bell,
  Harold Copp, David Tabor, Donald Ramsay, H.S.M. Coxeter, Frank Mackintosh,
   C.T.C. Wall, Anthony Leggett

Asociacion Universitaria y Cultural Andres Bello(Chile)
The German Commission For Rights of Chilean Women
The Criminal Lawyers' Association(Canada), Fellowship of Reconciliation
Noam Chomsky and many other linguists in many countries

To Help This Campaign, which will escalate until torture stopsin Chile:
   You can distribute copies of this Bulletin, you can contribute funds
   so that a secretary  can be employed, you can write a letter to the
  Ambassador of Chile to your country (sufficient address: Ambassador,
  Embassy of Chile, Capital City of your country) and express your
   opinion of the situation in Chile.

