Douglas Isbell
Headquarters, Washington, DC                     January 9,1997
(Phone: 202/358-1753)

John Bluck
Ames Research Center, Mountain View, CA
(Phone: 415/604-5026)


RELEASE: 97-7

SOFTWARE FOR FIRST NEW MILLENNIUM
MISSION CLOSEST YET TO "HAL 9000"

    As the fictional birthdate for the HAL 9000 main computer 
from the landmark science fiction tale "2001: A Space Odyssey" 
approaches, NASA is preparing the most advanced spacecraft 
artificial intelligence software yet developed for launch 
aboard the New Millennium program's Deep Space One (DS1) 
spacecraft.

    According to the 1968 book by highly acclaimed author 
Arthur C. Clarke, Hal "became operational" on January 12, 1997, 
in Urbana, IL, home of the University of Illinois.  It then 
served as the "brain and nervous system" of the 400-foot-long 
spaceship Discovery that carried astronauts on a thought-
provoking voyage to the planet Saturn (changed to Jupiter in 
the movie version).

    The robotic DS1 spacecraft carries no crew and is much 
smaller than the spaceship of "2001," at a total mass of 945 
pounds, but its computer artificial intelligence program, known 
as the Remote Agent, shares the same basic goal of operating 
and controlling a spacecraft with minimal human assistance.

    "We don't want to give the impression that Remote Agent is 
an artificial lifeform," said Kanna Rajan, a DS1 computer 
scientist at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, CA.  
"However, the software will logically reason about the state of 
the spacecraft, and the Remote Agent will consider all of the 
consequences of its actions."

    Following its scheduled July 1998 launch, DS1 will fly by 
the asteroid McAuliffe in 1999, and the comet West-Kohoutek-
Ikemura and the planet Mars in 2000.  DS1 is thefirst scheduled 
mission in NASA's New Millennium program, which is designed to 
test and validate cutting edge technology for the systems and 
instruments on-board future NASA science spacecraft.  The 
Remote Agent is being developed in a collaborative effort 
between Ames and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, 
CA.

    "The goals of the Remote Agent development are two-fold:  
to reduce the cost of exploration, and to extend exploration to 
realms of space where no ground-controlled craft could 
venture," said Dr. Bob Rasmussen, a computer autonomy expert at 
JPL.

    "Remote Agent should enable future spacecraft software to 
be more easily designed," said Dr. Barney Pell, another DS1 
computer scientist at Ames.  "The first version of Remote Agent 
will be the hardest to write. After that, we can copy it for 
the next mission and make improvements in it rather than 
developing the software from scratch."

    "This is made possible by model-driven software," Rasmussen 
explained.  "Models of the spacecraft's components and 
environment are given to the Remote Agent and it figures out 
the necessary detailed operating procedures on its own.  Only 
the models need to be updated for each new spacecraft."

    Given NASA's continuing efforts to develop many smaller, 
less expensive science spacecraft, "we also need to perform 
each mission with less than a dozen ground controllers instead 
of the hundreds of people now needed to run a major planetary 
science mission," said Dr. Brian C. Williams, DS1 team leader 
for the development of the Remote Agent fault protection 
software.  "The large distances inherent in planetary 
exploration result in communications that can be too slow 
during emergencies," Pell added, "and sometimes your 
communication pathway is blocked when a planet is between the 
spacecraft and Earth."

    Three parts of Remote Agent will work together to 
demonstrate that it can autonomously operate a spacecraft:  
High Level Planning and Scheduling, Model-based Fault 
Protection (also called Livingstone) and Smart Executive.  
"Some estimates show a 60 percent reduction in mission costs 
using Remote Agent.  The software would replace a large section 
of the human spacecraft control team back on Earth," said Dr. 
Nicola Muscettola, team leader for the planning software. 

    The High Level Planning and Scheduling part of Remote Agent 
will constantly look ahead to the schedule for several weeks of 
mission activities.  "Planner is mostly concerned about 
scheduling spacecraft activities and distributing resources 
such as electrical power," Muscettola said.  "The Planner 
allows a small spacecraft control team on Earth to command the 
spacecraft more effectively by sending goals instead of 
detailed instructions to DS1."

    "After DS1 we want to work on even more autonomous 
spacecraft that could reconfigure themselves.  If some part of 
such a spacecraft performed differently during the mission than 
expected, the craft would be able to detect this and change 
software models and algorithms to self-adapt," Muscettola 
added. 

    "Future systems also should be able to learn about their 
environment and act in partnership with scientists to find and 
analyze new discoveries," said Dr. Guy Man, the co-leader of 
the New Millennium Autonomy Integrated Product Development Team 
at JPL.

    The fault protection portion of the Remote Agent, known as 
"Livingstone," functions as the mission's virtual chief 
engineer, according to Dr. P. Pandurang Nayak of Ames.  "If 
something should go wrong with the spacecraft, Livingstone 
would use the computer model of how the spacecraft should be 
behaving to diagnose failures and suggest recoveries," Nayak 
said.

    Livingstone was named for David Livingstone (1813-1873), 
the 19th century medical missionary and explorer.  "Like David 
Livingstone, the Livingstone computer program is concerned with 
exploration and the health of explorers," Nayak said.

    The third part of the Remote Agent software, Smart 
Executive, will act like an "executive officer" of the mission, 
issuing general commands to fly DS1.  "The Executive has to be 
able to execute the plans that are produced by the Planner and 
Livingstone," said Pell.  "If the Planner had to worry about 
every single detail, it would be hard pressed to produce a 
plan.  So, the Executive takes care of the details."

    The Executive also can receive a plan directly from ground 
controllers.  "However, if the ground's plan won't work, the 
Executive can say, 'Sorry, Ground, I can't do that,' " Pell 
said, comparing Remote Agent to Hal.  "This can actually be a 
big help to ground controllers who must currently spend 
enormous effort double-checking every command," said Rasmussen.

    "In the event that the Remote Agent won't cooperate under 
some unusual circumstance, we will be developing a surgery mode 
where ground control can really get into Remote Agent and do a 
lobotomy," Pell added.  "Remote Agent may someday lead to 
software that would be incorporated into a space robot that 
would be as intelligent as HAL 9000."

    The New Millennium program "has accelerated technology 
development in spacecraft automation by at least ten years," 
Man said.  "The Remote Agent will open up new exploration 
opportunities for us, allowing us to really begin the in-situ 
era of space science." 

    The ultimate goal of the New Millennium program, according 
to Wesley Huntress, Associate Administrator for Space Science 
at NASA Headquarters, is to generate and validate technology 
"to allow us to build a fleet of these smart spacecraft, called 
spacecraft constellations or armadas, and let them explore 
different places, share their findings, and even divide amongst 
themselves the work of achieving complex scientific goals. 
Systems like the Remote Agent will be crucial supporting 
components of this vision."  

    The New Millennium program is managed by JPL for NASA's 
Office of Space Science and Office of Mission to Planet Earth, 
Washington, DC.

                             -end-

