July 8, 2005

Dolores Beasley
Headquarters, Washington 
(Phone: 202/358-1753)

DC Agle
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.
(Phone: 818/393-9011) 

Lee Tune
University of Maryland, College Park, Md.
(Phone: 301/405-4679)

RELEASE: 05-177

NASA'S DEEP IMPACT TELLS A TALE OF THE COMET

Data from Deep Impact's instruments indicate an immense cloud of fine 
powdery material was released when the probe slammed into the nucleus 
of comet Tempel 1 at 6.3 miles per second.

The cloud indicated the comet is covered in the powdery stuff. The 
Deep Impact science team continues to wade through gigabytes of data 
collected during the July 4 encounter with the 3-mile-wide by 
7-mile-long comet.

"The major surprise was the opacity of the plume the impactor created 
and the light it gave off," said Deep Impact Principal Investigator 
Dr. Michael A'Hearn of the University of Maryland, College Park. 
"That suggests the dust excavated from the comet's surface was 
extremely fine, more like talcum powder than beach sand. And the 
surface is definitely not what most people think of when they think 
of comets -- an ice cube."

How can a comet hurtling through our solar system be made of a 
substance with less strength than snow or even talcum powder? "You 
have to think of it in the context of its environment," said Pete 
Schultz, Deep Impact scientist from Brown University, Providence, 
R.I. "This city-sized object is floating around in a vacuum. The only 
time it gets bothered is when the sun cooks it a little or someone 
slams an 820-pound wakeup call at it at 23,000 miles per hour."

The data review process is not overlooking a single frame of 
approximately 4,500 images from the spacecraft's three imaging 
cameras taken during the encounter. "We are looking at everything 
from the last moments of the impactor to the final look-back images 
taken hours later, and everything in between," added A'Hearn. 
"Watching the last moments of the impactor's life is remarkable. We 
can pick up such fine surface detail that objects that are only four 
meters in diameter can be made out. That is nearly a factor of 10 
better than any previous comet mission."

The final moments of the impactor's life are important, because they 
set the stage for all subsequent scientific findings. Knowing the 
location and angle the impactor slammed into the comet's surface is 
the best place to start. Engineers have established the impactor took 
two not unexpected coma particle hits prior to impact. The impacts 
slewed the spacecraft's camera for a few moments before the attitude 
control system could get it back on track. The penetrator hit at an 
approximately 25 degree oblique angle relative to the comet's 
surface. That's when the fireworks began.

The fireball of vaporized impactor and comet material shot skyward. It 
expanded rapidly above the impact site at approximately 3.1 miles per 
second, and the crater was just beginning to form. Scientists are 
still analyzing the data to determine the exact size of the crater. 
Scientists say the crater was at the large end of original 
expectations, which was from 50 to 250 meters. 

Expectations for Deep Impact's flyby spacecraft were exceeded during 
its close brush with the comet. The craft is more than 2.2 million 
miles from Tempel 1 and opening the distance at approximately 23,000 
mph. The flyby spacecraft is undergoing a thorough checkout, and all 
systems appear to be in excellent operating condition.

The Deep Impact mission was implemented to provide a glimpse beneath 
the surface of a comet, where material from the solar system's 
formation remains relatively unchanged. Mission scientists hoped the 
project would answer basic questions about the formation of the solar 
system by providing an in-depth picture of the nature and composition 
of comets. 

The University of Maryland is responsible for overall Deep Impact 
mission science, and project management is handled by JPL. The 
spacecraft was built for NASA by Ball Aerospace & Technologies 
Corporation, Boulder, Colo. For information about Deep Impact on the 
Internet, visit: 

http://www.nasa.gov/deepimpact 

For information about NASA and agency programs on the Web, visit: 

http://www.nasa.gov/home/index.html 

	
-end-
