                           Monthly Hotline Report
                                October 1993

RCRA/Superfund/OUST and Emergency Planning and Community
Right-to-Know Act

The RCRA/Superfund/OUST and Emergency Planning and Community
Right-to-Know Act Monthly Hotline Report provides valuable OSWER
programmatic information. This bulletin contains excerpts from
the Report's "Questions and Answer" and "Publications" sections.
The full report is available from the U.S. National Technical
Information Service at 703-487-4650. For other information,
please contact the RCRA/Superfund/OUST Hotline at 1-800-424-9346
or the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act Hotline
at 1-800-424-9346.

EPA Report Number: EPA/530-R-93-004j
NTIS Number: PB93-922410

                        Hotline Questions and Answers

RCRA


1.   Effective Date Delayed for Certain MSWLFs

  EPA promulgated criteria for municipal solid waste landfills
in 1991 to provide minimum national performance standards and to
reduce the risk of harmful effects of solid waste on human health
and the environment (56 FR 50978; October 9, 1991).  Codified at
40 CFR Part 258, the municipal solid waste landfill (MSWLF)
regulations require landfill owners and operators to comply with
specific location restrictions, operating criteria, design
criteria, groundwater monitoring and corrective action, closure
and post-closure care, and financial assurance criteria.  These
regulations establish a schedule of compliance for owners and
operators that spans several years.  EPA recently issued a rule
changing the effective dates of the federal MSWLF criteria for
certain landfills (58 FR 51536; October 1, 1993).  What specific
changes to the MSWLF criteria were finalized?


  EPA recognized that a variety of circumstances made compliance
with the MSWLF criteria's October 9, 1993, deadline difficult for
certain MSWLF owners and operators.  Landfills in smaller
communities have encountered the most difficulty meeting the
deadline, despite good-faith efforts, because financial
conditions, legal challenges, and geography have created
significant obstacles to compliance.  To provide regulatory
relief for owners and operators, EPA has changed some of the
effective dates of the MSWLF criteria.  Specifically, limited
extensions have been provided for these existing smaller
landfills and for landfills accepting waste resulting from the
flooding in the Midwest.  Additional extensions also have been
granted to all landfills required to comply with the financial
assurance and final cover regulations.

  The Part 258 regulations required existing landfills to comply
with most requirements by October 9, 1993.  EPA has extended the
compliance date for eligible small landfills to April 9, 1994. 
Eligible landfills are those that accept less than 100 tons of
solid waste per day; are located in a state that has submitted an
application to EPA for approval of its permit program by October
9, 1993, or are located on Indian lands or Indian country; and
are not on CERCLA's National Priorities List.

  In the October 1, 1993, final rule, EPA also provided some
regulatory relief for MSWLFs accepting waste resulting from the
flooding in the Midwest.  The effective date may be extended up
to April 9, 1994, for existing landfills regardless of size, if a
landfill owner or operator's state determines that an extension
is needed to manage flood-related waste from federally designated
disaster areas.  These states also may allow their landfills up
to six more months (beyond April 9, 1994) to comply with the
federal regulations.  Federal disaster areas covered by this
extension are in the states of Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota,
Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.

  For all landfills, the requirement to obtain financial
assurance has been delayed from April 9, 1994, to April 9, 1995. 
EPA believes that the extension will allow adequate time to
promulgate a financial test for local governments and an
additional mechanism for corporations.  EPA also has extended the
time allowed to install a final cover for those landfills that
cease receiving waste before the effective date of the
regulations.  A final cover that meets the federal criteria in 40
CFR Sections 258.60(a) or (b) must be installed in most cases by
October 9, 1994.
                             
  In response to a court decision, the exemption from
groundwater monitoring requirements for very small, arid, and
remote landfills has been removed.  The effective date for
landfills previously qualifying for the exemption is October 9,
1995.  EPA is still committed to investigating alternative
groundwater monitoring requirements for this group and will
continue to examine this issue.

  The above summary represents an overview of the new federal
compliance dates.  EPA strongly encourages owners and operators
of MSWLFs to consult with their state or tribal government as
they may have earlier effective dates or other requirements.


CERCLA

2.   Dense Nonaqueous Phase Liquid         (DNAPL) Contamination
at Superfund      Sites

  Groundwater remediation at Superfund sites can be much more
difficult when contaminants such as chlorinated solvents (e.g.,
tetrachloroethylene, methylene chloride, carbon tetrachloride),
creosote, coal tar, wood preserving wastes (e.g., 
pentachloro-phenol), and some pesticides are present in their
undiluted form.  These contaminants are examples of compounds
classified as dense nonaqueous phase liquids (DNAPLs).  What are
dense nonaqueous phase liquids?  How can the likelihood of DNAPL
presence at a Superfund site be estimated?  What special
precautions must be taken when DNAPLs are suspected to be present
in the subsurface, and how should remediation be approached?  Are
there different cleanup standards for DNAPLs?

  Dense nonaqueous phase liquids are contaminants that are
immiscible with and more dense than water in their undiluted
form, meaning they sink in water.  A contaminant that is
immiscible with water does not readily mix with water, but does
slowly dissolve in it.  Other contaminants such as crude oil,
fuels, and other petrochemicals are light nonaqueous phase
liquids (LNAPLs) which are less dense than water, hence they
float on the water table.  DNAPLs, because of their dense nature,
migrate vertically downward, driven by gravity through soil and
groundwater.  Once in the ground, DNAPL migration is influenced
by hydrogeologic features such as soil layering, impermeable
layers, or bedrock, and DNAPLs can penetrate fractures in clay
layers or bedrock.  As DNAPLs migrate through the subsurface, a
portion becomes trapped in pore spaces or fractures in the soil,
while the portion not trapped can continue to migrate downward. 
The DNAPL that becomes trapped in the soil is called residual
DNAPL, while the portion of the contaminant that can continue to
migrate or form pools on impermeable layers (like clay) is called
free-phase DNAPL.  Once the contaminant becomes dissolved in the
groundwater, it enters the aqueous (or dissolved) phase and is no
longer categorized as a DNAPL.  The following figure provides
further clarification.


  DNAPLs' strong tendency toward vertical migration can make
site characterization difficult.  The methods recommended for
estimating the likelihood of DNAPL contamination at Superfund
sites include reviewing the historical use of the site to
determine if DNAPL chemicals were used, stored, or disposed of;
measuring the relative concentration of contaminants present in
the soil; and measuring the relative concentration of
contaminants dissolved in groundwater for those contaminants that
are DNAPLs in their undiluted form (OSWER Directive 9355.4-07FS).

  When DNAPLs are present in the subsurface, special precautions
should be taken during site characterization.  When
characterizing the subsurface, EPA recommends that bore holes be
drilled first in areas that are least likely to contain DNAPLs,
such as areas away from suspected sources (this is referred to as
an "outside-in" strategy).  Drilling in suspected DNAPL areas
should be minimized.  When drilling in site areas where DNAPLs
are suspected, drilling should cease when an impermeable layer
such as clay is encountered.  If the bore hole penetrates the
impermeable layer and free-phase DNAPL is present, then the
gravity-driven DNAPL will migrate down the hole.  EPA also
recommends that noninvasive methods such as geophysical or
geochemical surveys be used to characterize subsurface conditions
in order to reduce the number of bore holes needed for this
purpose, and to minimize the risk of causing further DNAPL
migration.  

  When DNAPL contamination is confirmed or highly suspected, the
recommended approach to remediation at Superfund sites is to (1)
contain the dissolved contamination plume, (2) contain or isolate
areas containing subsurface DNAPLs from the dissolved plume, (3)
extract the free-phase DNAPL to the extent possible, (4) where
appropriate, restore groundwater in the dissolved plume to its
current or potential use, and (5) consider using innovative
cleanup technologies to remove as much DNAPL source material as
possible.  EPA also recommends that containment of the
contamination plume be implemented as an early action.

  The cleanup standards for the remediation of
DNAPL-contaminated groundwater are dependent on the current or
potential use of the groundwater.  For example, groundwater that
is a potential future source of drinking water usually must meet
chemical-specific cleanup standards that are relevant and
appropriate for drinking water.  Such cleanup standards are
generally attainable over site areas where only dissolved
contaminants are present in groundwater.  For those site areas
where DNAPLs are present in their undiluted form and cannot be
removed, it may be appropriate to consider waiving cleanup
standards due to technical impracticability from an engineering
perspective, consistent with EPA guidance (OSWER Directive
9234.2-25).

                              New Publications

How to Order...

NTIS publications are available by calling 703-487-4650 or
writing NTIS, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22161. Be
sure to include the NTIS order number listed under the document.

EPA publications are available through the Hotline. Use the EPA 
order number listed under the document.

RCRA/SF/OUST:  1-800-424-9346
               703-412-9810 (local)

EPCRA/Title III:  1-800-424-9346
                  703-412-9877

RCRA

TITLE: "Municipal Solid Waste Regional and Headquarters
       Grant/Output Directory"
AVAILABILITY:  Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.:  EPA530-B-93-003

This directory provides information about municipal solid waste
documents, videos, reports, software, and brochures published as
a result of EPA regional and Headquarters grants.  The directory
is divided into sections covering composting, educational
programs, integrated waste management, land disposal, recycling,
and source reduction.  Intended as a reference document, it
contains summaries of the documents and provides regional
contacts for additional information.

TITLE:  "Reporting on Municipal Solid Waste: A Local Issue"
AVAILABILITY:  Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.:  EPA530-K-93-002

This document is written primarily for journalists who cover
solid waste management issues.  It explains the major issues and
potential pitfalls in covering solid waste management.  The
document also presents a variety of statistics and provides
summaries and pertinent questions to ask about major topic, as
well as graphs, charts, and information resources.  There are
sections dealing with federal, state, and local roles and options
in solid waste management.

TITLE:  "RCRA Public Involvement Manual"
AVAILABILITY:  NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.:  PB93-231 066

This guidance document is intended to assist RCRA-regulated
facilities and EPA technical staff in implementing statutory and
program-required public participation activities.  The document
provides a general overview of public involvement, as well as
information about public involvement during the RCRA permitting
process and corrective action.  It contains step-by-step
instructions, case studies, and lists of resources.   The manual
also contains the fact sheet entitled Modifying RCRA Permits and
documents pertaining to EPA's draft strategy for hazardous waste
combustion.
CERCLA

TITLE: "Guidance on Conducting Non-Time-Critical Removal Actions
       Under CERCLA"
AVAILABILITY:  NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.:  PB93-963 402 

This guidance provides information on the procedures and
activities EPA uses in conducting non-time-critical removal
actions under CERCLA and the National Contingency Plan (NCP). 
On-Scene Coordinators (OSCs) and Regional Project Managers (RPMs)
should use this guidance to ensure that non-time-critical removal
actions are conducted in accordance with applicable laws,
regulations, and EPA policy.

TITLE:  "Technology Selection Guide for Wood Treater Sites"
AVAILABILITY:  NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.:  PB93-963 329

This fact sheet is part of a series of guidance documents being
developed on presumptive remedies at various categories of sites. 
Specifically, this fact sheet provides the technology selection
guide for woodtreater sites, covering information on specific
technologies and performance data.  The information includes a
procedural outline, practical considerations, and treatment
technology tables for sludge, soil, sediment, and ground and
surface water.

TITLE:  "Superfund Accelerated Cleanup Model (SACM)"
AVAILABILITY:  NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.:  PB94-963 201

This memorandum introduces a coordination strategy designed to
promote the implementation of the Superfund Accelerated Cleanup
Model (SACM).  Regional access to Headquarters' Superfund offices
and collaboration in implementing SACM will improve with this new
coordination strategy.

TITLE: "Additional Guidance on 'Worst Sites' and 'NPL Caliber
       Sites' to Assist in SACM Implementation"
AVAILABILITY:  NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.:  PB94-963 206

This document is intended to assist the Regions by providing
clear guidance on what constitutes National Priorities List
(NPL)-caliber sites and worst sites.  This document also
discusses the actions needed to implement these terms under the
Superfund Accelerated Cleanup Model (SACM).

TITLE: "Personal Air Sampling and Air Monitoring Requirements
       Under 29 CFR $1910.120"
AVAILABILITY:  NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.:  PB93-963 420

This fact sheet summarizes the Hazardous Waste Operations and
Emergency Response (HAZWOPER) air monitoring and sampling aspects
of the OSHA requirements promulgated at 29 CFR Section 1910.120. 
It provides an introduction to air monitoring and air sampling,
air monitoring requirements upon and after initial entry,
conducting air monitoring and sampling, and available information
sources and contacts.

TITLE: "Superfund and Enforcement Program Publications Update
       (Volume 1, Number 4)"
AVAILABILITY:  NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.:  PR881D

This bulletin supplements the 1992 Compendium of Superfund
Program Publications by listing the OERR and OWPE publications
issued from October 1991 through July 1993.

TITLE: "Superfund EPA/ICMA Superfund Revitalization Conference
       -- San Francisco, California, February 1-2, 1993"
AVAILABILITY:  NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.:  PB94-963 202

On February 1-2, 1993, the Superfund Revitalization Office held a
meeting in San Francisco to encourage public participation in
identifying innovative, nontraditional approaches to expedite the
Superfund cleanup process.  This report documents suggestions and
written comments made by attendees at the meeting, as well as
comments prepared specifically to address the issues discussed at
the meetings.

TITLE: "The Effect of OSHA's Bloodborne Pathogens Standard on
       Hazardous Waste Cleanup Activities"
AVAILABILITY:  NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.:  PB93-963 419

This fact sheet describes the additional planning, training, and
medical surveillance requirements that the new OSHA standard on
bloodborne pathogens imposes on On-Scene Coordinators (OSCs) and
Regional Project Managers (RPMs) during a Superfund response
action.

EPCRA

TITLE: "Hydrogen Fluoride Study Final Report: Report to
       Congress; Section 112(n)(6) Clean Air Act as Amended"
AVAILABILITY:  Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.: EPA550-R-93-001

With the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990, Congress mandated EPA
to conduct a study on hydrofluoric acid (HF).  In this study, EPA
examines the potential hazards to public health and the
environment in the event of a release of HF.  This document
presents a characterization of the HF industry, HF release
models, and examples of major accidents.

TITLE: "Hazards Analysis on the Move: SARA Title III (EPCRA) and
       Conducting a Commodity Flow Study"
AVAILABILITY:  Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.:  EPA550-F-93-004

This fact sheets outlines the basic principles of conducting a
hazardous commodity flow study (CFS).  Local planners and
responders may use CFSs to determine what hazardous materials are
being transported through their communities and to locate
priority areas of risk that warrant further analysis.  The fact
sheet also presents various survey methods and lists their
advantages and disadvantages.

TITLE: "Successful Practices in Title III Implementation --
       Chemical Emergency Prepardedness and Prevention Technical
       Assistance Bulletin"
AVAILABILITY:  Hotline
NTIS ORDER NO.:  OSWER-93-006.1, Series 6, No. 10

The "Successful Practices in Title III Implementation" series
offers up-to-date planning information to local emergency
planning committees (LEPCs), state emergency response commissions
(SERCs), and other interested agencies.  This installment offers
examples of effective strategies used in implementing the
emergency planning provisions of SARA Title III and a subject
index of the contents of all of the Successful Practices
documents in this series.

OUST

TITLE:  "Guidance for Federal Field Citation Enforcement"
AVAILABILITY:  Hotline
EPA ORDER NO.:  OSWER Directive 9610.16

This directive provides guidance to EPA regional offices on
setting up and implementing a federal field citations program.  
A Field citation is an enforcement tool for use in certain
situations where owners and operators of USTs violate UST
regulations.  This document supersedes OSWER Directive 9610.14
(of the same title) and supplements OSWER Directive 9610.12, U.S.
EPA Penalty Guidance for Violations of UST Regulations.

 
OTHER

TITLE:  "Monthly Hotline Report" 
AVAILABILITY:  NTIS
NTIS ORDER NO.: See below

Yearly Subscription      PB93-922 400
                         530-R-93-004 

January 1993             PB93-922 401 
                         530-R-93-004a

February 1993            PB93-922 402
                         530-R-93-004b 

March 1993               PB93-922 403
                         530-R-93-004c

April 1993               PB93-922 404
                         530-R-93-004d

May 1993                 PB93-922 405
                         530-R-93-004e

June 1993                PB93-922 406
                         530-R-93-004f

July 1993                PB93-922 407
                         530-R-93-004g

August 1993              PB93-922 408
                         530-R-93-004h

September 1993           PB93-922 409
                         530-R-93-004i

October                  PB93-922 410
                         530-R-93-004j


The reports contain questions that required EPA resolution or
were frequently asked, publications availability, Federal
Register summaries, and Hotline call statistics.

The Monthly Hotline Reports are also available for downloading at
no charge from CLU-IN at (301) 589-8366.

                         