It used to be said in my home town, that the cheapest funeral you could
get consisted of taking a candle in your hand and going out, yourself, to the
churchyard. As judged by the previous introductory articles, this one should
be something iike it: an obituary written by the fcliow himself. Let it be that.
I hase no qrlarrel with the idea of ctttnf&&ng my cycle of life, 1Yhat goes
against the grain is writing about myscif, since I am averse tu ali forms of
exhibitionism. i\Ioreover, I like to look forward, not back.

Overlooking my case history, I find a complete dichotomy. On the one
hand, my inner story is csccedingly simple, if not indeed dull: my life has
been devoted to science and my oniy real ambition has been to contribute to
it and live up to its standards. In complete contradiction to this, the external
course has been rather bumpy. I finished school in feudal Hungary as the son
of a wealthy landowner and I had no worries about my future. A few years
later I find myself working in IIamburg, Germany, with a slight hunger
edema. In 1942 I find myself in Istanbul, involved in secret diplomatic activ-
ity with a setting fit for a cheap and exciting spy story. Shortly after, f get
a warning that Hitler had ordered the Governor of Hungary to appear before
him, screaming my name at the top of his voice and demanding my delivery.
Arrest warrants were passed out fvcn against members of my family. In my
pocket I find a Swedish passport, having been made a full Swedish citizen on
the order of the King of Swztiert--I am "Mr. Swenson," my wife, "Mrs.
Sw5wm." Sometime later I find myself in Moscow, treated in the most
royal fashion by the Go\-crnment (with caviar three times a day), but it does
not t&e long before I am declared "a traitor of the people" and I play the
roic of the villain on the stages of Budapest. At the same time, I am refused
entrance to the US:1 for my Soviet sympathies. Eventually, I find pcncc at
U'oods Hole, Massachusetts, working in a solitary corner of the hlarine
Biological I.&oratory. After some nerve-racking complications, due to
XfcCarthy, things straightened out, but the internal st,ruggle is not cofn~
pletcfy over. I am tmublcd by grave doubts about the usefulness of scientific
endeavor and have a whole dianer frlled with treatises on politics and their
relation to science, written for myself with the sole purpose of clarifying my
mind, and finding an answer to the question: will science lend to the elevation
or destruction of nmn, and has lit)- scirulific cndcavor any sense?

All this, in itself, would ha\~ no intcrcst. `There arc many who did rncwr:
for science, were braver, st~ffercd mc)re agony and even paid the pcnalt y of
death. \\`hat may Icu~l infrrcst to i11y story is that it fcffects the trfrhfcnctt
of our days. So to give sense to my story I will have to start by asking: wh!
all this trouble and what is its relation to science?

* * *


2               SZENT-GYORGYI
Erasmus of Rotterdam, that sage of the Early R.enaissance, distinguished

between calm and turbulent periods of human history which shows through-
out the same repetitive story. Man develops a certain philosophy and creates
the corresponding institutions and there is peace. Then his thoughts change
and the new outlook has to fight the outgrown structure and thinking, with
all its prejudice and vested interest; there is trouble till the new views pre-
dominate and the corresponding new order is established.

The world has never known a more tumultuous period than ours and 50, if
Erasmus is correct, there has to be a correspondingly steep change in our
ideas, a change more profound than any cnrlier enc. It is clrnr to me what
this change is: a transition from the prescientilic to the scientilic. Not only is
this change profound, but it has come upon us too suddenly, leaving no time
to adjust.

The difference between the two worlds is best illustrated by the story of
the two stones, and of Aristotle, one of the greatest prescientific thinkers,
and Gaiileo, one of the first modern scientists. Aristotle said that a big stone
falls faster than a small one. The interesting point about this statement is not
that it was wrong, but that it never occurred to Aristotle that he could try an
experiment, to test his ideas. He would have considered such a proposal an
insult. Man had only to think to find the truth, his mind being superior to
crude experience. `I`he mind reigned supreme. There was no reason to doubt,
either, that what the senses conveyed was the last reality. If we touch things,
they feel hard or soft, wet or dry; so, according to Aristotle, these had to be
the ultimate elements out of which the world was built. There could not be
the least doubt that it was the Universe which rotated around us. It was oniy
a small additional step to suppose that even our feelings were trustworthy
guides and that our everyday experience could be extended to problems
beyond our reach. So if man resented death there could be no death, only
Hades, He!!, or lieaven. If man wants a house, he has to build it, so if there
is a Universe, somebody must have built it and be running it, somebody more
powerful than ourselves. So man populated his world with gods, one or many,
shaped in his own image. But even if there were beings more powerful than
ourselves, we had to be their main concern, and remainrtl the center.

So gradually, man built himself an imaginary world based on "faith,"
that is, accepting things without evidence. This faith was codified at different
ages as religions in the name of which men tortured, subjugated, and killed
one another. What underlay this prescientific thinking was man's trend for
autistic thinking and his boundless self-conhdence. ~~%i!e thinking himself
the center, supreme master and judge, man had to remain the toy of Nature.

Two thousand years after Aristotle, something must have happened to
man's mind for llere and there people appeared, like Copernicus or Kepler,
who modestly tried to put two and two together, while a boisterous young
man went up a leaning toner to drop two stones, a big one and a small one,
bidding his companions to o!,serl-e which one hit the pavement first. What is
essential about this simple act was a humble attitude: if we want to find out

LOST IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY          3

something about the world around us we have to ask questions modestly,
that is, do experiments.

The same young man did not trust the perfection of his senses either, and
later built the telescope to improve his sight. With his improved sight he
could see the satellites of Jupiter and the rings of Saturn, never seen by man
before, clearly indicating that the,.Universe could not have been created
solely for man's pleasure or temptation. Today, three and a half centuries
later, we see experimental science in rapid expansion, changing all parameters
of human existence, creating an entirely new world, in which man has become
the short-lived inhabitant of one of the small satellites of one of the millions
of star5 of one of the millions of galasifs, in a Universe expanding at increas-
ing speed, dominated by quantum laws. What underlies this change is a new
scientific thinking. The essential feature of this thinking is humility, the
realization of our imperfections. The first command of this thinking is to
accept nothing without evidence, face problems as such, with a cool head,
without fear or prejudice, with uncompromising honesty of thought,
unbiassed by fear, hopes, or interest.

We are living in the middle of the transition from the prescientific to the
scientific thinking, hence the "tumult." We still have God on our lips and our
coins, but no more in our hearts. If we are taken ill we may still pray, but we
take penicillin alongside. We pray for peace but heap up H-bombs for safety.
We preach Christ and talk "overkill." This world is symbolized for me by the
colossal statue of Christ, standing on a hill in Spain, stretching out His Arms
to mankind, and wearing on His Head an enormous lightning conductor to
protect Him, should the Almighty Father try to smite Him by lightning. We
find the new expanding Universe a rather cold place and do not dare to
abandon the old one. The trouble is that the two worlds cannot be mixed and
the father inquisitor was right when he said to Galileo that "your teaching
and the teaching of the church cannot exist side by side." We cannot build,
unpunished, H-bombs by science either, and then run them with the XVIII
Century egotistic, narrow, sentimental, and deceitful political thinking. It
makes no sense to shoot astronauts out into space to reach other stars and
erect ten-foot concrete walls to separate man from man. In its own time pre-
scientific thinking did build a staljle world, but science has irretrievably
undermined the acquiescence in misery as the attribute of human existence,
and has undermined the old hierarchies of gods, princes, barons, haves and
have-nots, well-fed and hungry, developed and underdeveloped.

There is no way back, and we have to face squarely, the free choice be-
tween undreamed of wealth and dignity, and self-destruction which science
has orfered. My problem is: to what is science leading, and whether science
can build a world in which man can feel, once Snore, at home? I will attempt
to answer these questions at the end, after having given my case history.

* * *


4               SZENT-GYi)RGY I
On my Mother's side, I am the fourth generation of scientists. My Father
was interested only in farming and so my Mother's influence prevailed.
Music filled the house and the conversation at the table roamed about the
intellectual achievements of the entire world. Politics and finance had no
place in our thoughts. I am a scientist, myself, because at an early age I
learned that only intellectual values were worth striving for, artistic or
scientific creation being the highest aim. I strongly believe that we establish
the coordinates of our evaluation at a very early age. What we do later
depends on this scale of values which mostly cannot be changed later. We
are somewhat like Dr. Lore& goose which has hatched at the foot of a chair
and recognized the chair as its mother all its later life. This is important for
education, in case we are not intending to produce only "corporation men"
with their intellectual crew cuts.

I must have been a very dull child. Nothing happened to me. I read no
books and needed private tutoring to pass my exams. Around puberty, some-
thing changed and I became a voracious reader and decided to become a
scientist. My uncle, a noted histologist (M. Lenhossek), who dominated our
family and was a precocious child himself, violently protested, seeing no
future for such a dull youngster in science. When his opinion gradually im-
proved, he consented to my going into cosmetics. Later, he even considered
my becoming a dentist. When I finished high school with top marks, he
admitted the possibility of my becoming a proctologist (specialist of anus and
rectum; he had haemorrhoids). So my first scientific paper, written in the
first year of my medical studies, dealt with the epithelium of the anus. I
started science on the wrong end, but soon I shifted to the vitreous body, the
fibrillar fine structure I explored with new methods.
I have mentioned this early history of mine because it suggests that no
final judgment should be made of children at too earIy an age.
I must have achieved some reputation as a histologist when, as a third-
year medical student, I became increasingly discontent with morphology
which told me little about life. So, I shifted to physiology but had to break
my studies for compulsory military service. World War I found me in
uniform.

Centuries-old tradition told us Hungarians to ask no question when we
were called upon to fight. I did accordingly, but during the first three years
of the war I was gradually overcome by a burning desire to return to science.
At the same time I became increasingly disgusted with the moral turpitude
of military service. I could see clearly that we had lost the war and that we
were being sacrificed senselessly by a ruling clique; the best service I could do
for my country was to stay alive. So, one day, when in the field, I took my
gun and shot myself through the bone of my arm. With all the deeply in-
grained tradition this was quite difficult to do and it was also the more
dangerous road. Anyway, it took me back to the capital where I got my
M.D., after which I continued my service in a bacteriological laboratory of
the army. Here, I got into trouble but once, when I objected to experiments,

         LOST IN THE T\I'ENTIETH CENTURY          5
dangerous to life, done on Italian prisoners of war. Since the man responsible
for these experiments had two stars more than I had, I was punished, and
sent to the North Italian swamps where tropical malaria made life expec-
tancy very short. A few weeks later the war collapsed and so I pulled out
alive and returned to the laboratory.

I wanted to understand life but found the complexity of physiology over-
whelming. So I shifted to phartna&logy where, at least, one of the partners,
the drug, was simple. This, I found, did not relieve the difficulty. So, I went
into bacteriology, but found bacteria too complex, too. I shifted on, to
physicochemistry and then to chemistry, that is, to molecules, the smallest
units in those days. Ten years ago I found molecules too complex and shifted
to electrons, hoping to have reached bottom. I3ttt Nature has no bottom: its
most basic principle is "organization." If Nature puts two things tagether
she produces something new with new qualities, which cannot be expressed
in terms of qualities of the components. LVhen going from electrons and
protons to atoms, from here to molecules, molecular aggregates, etc., up to
the cell or the whole animal, at every level we find something new, a new
breathtaking vista. Whenever we separate two things, we lose something,
something which may have been the most essential feature. So now, at 68, I
am to work my way up again f&lowing electrons in their motion through
more extensive systems, hoping to arrive, someday, at an understanding of
the cellular level of organization. So the internal course of my life made a
smooth sinusoid curve; not so the external course.

After the War, I became assistant at the pharmacological laboratory of
the newly founded University in Pozsony, an old Hungarian town. A few
months later Pozsony was given, by the Versailles Treaty, to Czechoslovakia
(it is now called Rratislava) and we had to clear out. We saved our scientiiic
equipment not without danger, getting it one night, dressed as workmen,
through the closely guarded gates of the campus. Meanwhile, in Hungary, the
communists took over, which meant a complete loss of all my belongings. At
the very last moment, I rescued one thousand English pounds. These I
shared with my Mother, whom I visited at I3udapest. For such a visit the
wintry Danube had to be crossed in a small overcroaded boat at night, at a
point where there were no Czech patrols, who shot at sight. In my comparly
was a nun, Sister Angelica, who was deadly frightened and clung to me
desperately. On my return I had to spend a night in the snow and arrived in
Pozsony with a grave pneumonia. I probably owe my life to the devoted
nursing of Sister Angelica. After this, I took my wife and child and steered
west. The English pounds allowed me to live, very modestly, for a little
while, during which time I wanted to gratify my desire to do research. First,
I went to Prague to learn some electrophysiology from Armin von Tschcr-
mak, from there to Berlin to learn about pH from Rlichaelis, (~110 later
spent his last summer in my guest house at Woods Hole). From Berlin I lvcnt
to Namlturg to the Institute for Tropical IIygiene. My calculation was that
while I did research on physicochemical lines, I would learn enough about


6               SZENT-GYCiRGYI
tropical medicine to be hired by some colonial government, once my money
gave out. This time having arrived, I bought my tropical equipment, ready
to go, but fate would have it that the Dutch Physiological Society held its
meeting in Hamburg, and one of the participants was W. Storm van Leeu-
wen, professor of pharmacology in Leiden. He had with him Professor Fritz
Verzar, serving as his associate professor. Verzar was about to return to
Hungary so he introduced me to Storm van Leeuwen who invited me to take
Verzar's post, which I took. After two years at Leiden, where I devoted my
free time to learning chemistry, I joined Hamburger's Laboratory at Gron-
ingen where I worked for another four years. Salaries were very low but
allowed for a very modest life, which was happy and quiet.

Now, I thought myself capable of tackling a biochemical problem. I
embarked on biological oxidations. At that time a violent controversy raged
between 0. War-burg and II. Wieland and their followers. The former thought
that oxygen activation was the most essentia1 feature of respiration, while
Wieland put H-activation in the fore. I could show that both processes were
involved. I simply knocked out 0% activation (and with it, respiration) by
cyanide and then added methylene blue to the minced tissue. The dye
restored respiration, replacing 02 activation. It was reduced by activated H
and then reoxidized spontaneously. During these experiments I became
fascinated by the succino- and citrocodehydrogenase. These dehydrogenases
differed from other dehydrogenases by being bound to structure, and "struc-
ture" had to mean something very important. They could not possibly be
just ordinary metabolic enzymes, they had to have some general catalytic
role. If this was so, then the whole of respiration had to be inhibited once the
succino-dehydrogenase was inactivated, which could be done by malonic
acid, as shown earlier by Quastel. So I added malonic acid to the minced
tissue, and respiration stopped. This proved that succinic acid (and citric
acid) had to have some general catalytic activity and could not be simply
metabolites, as thought before. These ideas were later completed by Krebs
and are the foundation of the so-called "Krebs cycle." It was partly this
discovery of the Cd dicarboxylic acid catalysis which was honored later by
the Nobei prize.

I also became interested in vegetable respiration, being convinced that
there is no basic difference between man and the grass he mows. Plants, at
that time, were divided into two groups: the "catechol oxidase" and "peroxi-
dase" plants. I started with the catechol oxidase plants which contain cate-
chol and a strong catechol oxidase. I simplified the accepted, rather complex
ideas about this oxidation system. Then I shifted to "peroxidase plants"
which are catled so because they contain peroxidase in high concentration.
If peroxide is added to a mixture of peroxidase and benzidine, immediately
an intense blue color appears due to the oxidation of benzidine. I found that
if the reaction was performed with the plant juice, instead of purified peroxi-
dase, there was a very short delay, of a second or so, in the benzidine reaction.
This fascinated me. There had to be present a reducing agent which reduced

LOST IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

7

the oxidized benzidine, the delay corresponding to the time necessary to
oxidize away this unknown reducing agent, later to be known as ascorbic
acid.

I mention this story in such detail because it illustrates the basic trait of
my way of working. I make the wifdest theories, connecting up the test tube
reaction with broadest philosophical ideas, but spend most of my time in the
laboratory, playing with living matter, keeping my eyes open, observing and
pursuing the smallest detail. The current fashion is to avoid making theories
(they may be wrong!) and limit one's observations to reading pointers. I
think that an intimate finger-tip friendship with living matter is still im-
portant for the biologist. By working in this way, usually something crops
up, some small discrepancy, which, if followed up, may lead to basic dis-
coveries. The theories serve to satisfy the mind, prepare it for an "accident,"
and keep one going. I must admit that most of the new observations I made
were based on wrong theories. My theories collapsed, but something was left
afterwards.

I also made theories about the adrenal gland which led me to assume that
the reducing agent of peroxidase plants shouid also be present in the adrenal
cortex in high concentration. I found it was present (though the underlying
theory turned out to be wrong later).

Hamburger's death made an end to all this. His successor was a psy-
chologist who disliked chemistry and disliked me with it. I thought that I
had to give up altogether, being still a beginner in science, who had no more
money and no foreign diploma, So I sent my wife with our child back to
Hungary to her parents and prepared for the end. I saw no chance left. For
a farewell to science I went to attend the International Physiological Con-
gress at Stockholm (1926). The presidential address was delivered by Sir
Frederick Gowfand Hopkins, who, to my surprise, mentioned my name three
times, more than anyone else's. So, after his lecture I picked up all my cour-
age and addressed him. "Why don't you come to Cambridge?" he asked.
"1 will see to it that you get a Rockefeller fellowship." And so he did. He was,
and still is, a mystery to me. He was the man who had the most influence on
my scientific development though 1 never talked to him about science and
heard him speak but once or twice. His papers were not especially fascinat-
ing, yet he had a magic influence on the people around him. That little
unassuming man, with all his childish vanity, was a humble searcher of
truth. What his individuality proclaimed was that in spite of all the hard
work involved, research is not a systematic occupation but an intuitive artistic
vocation.

In Cambridge I isolated the reducing agent found at Groningen. I
crystallized it from oranges, lemons, cabbages, and adrenal glands. I knew it
was related to sugars, only did not know which. "Ignosco" meaning "don't
know" and the ending "ose" meaning sugar, I called this carbohydrate
"ignose." Harden, the editor of the BdochenzicuZ Journal, did not like jokes
and reprimanded me. "Godnose" was not more successful and so, following


8                SZENT-GYBRGYI

Harden's proposition, I called the new substance "hexuronic acid" since it
had 6 C's and was acidic. I got my Ph.D. for it.

The trouble was that I could make it on bigger scale from one tnateriaf
only, adrenal glands, but these were not available in England in sumcient
quantity. So I accepted N. Kendall's invitation to go to the Mayo Clinic, at
Rochester, Minnesota, where ample material from the St. Paul slaughter-
houses was available. I worked for one year in the USA, to return to Cam-
bridge with 25 grams of "hesuronic acid" in my pocket, most of which f
gave to Haworth, the great carbohydrate chemist, who undertook the
constitution analysis.

Hungary, at that time (1932), had a very outstanding nlinister (Secre-
tary) of Education. Ile wanted to modernize Hungarian science and asked
for my help. So I accepted the chair of medical chemistry at the University,
Szeged, and ieft Cambridge with a heavy heart, for the University of Szcged.
My laboratory was soon filled with able young researchers. I went back to
oxidation and was soon fascinated by an unknoivn yeilow dyestuff, "cyto-
flave," with its splendid fluorescence and reversible reducibility. Having no
spectroscope, I could not describe it properly. Now it is called ribo~~vin. I
also became intercstcd in lactocodehydrogenase, found its activity finked to
a coenzyme, a nucleotide, which I isolated in quantity in order to hydrolyze
it for its analysis. I had a strong hunch that pyridine derivatives were in-
volved as bases. I wanted to precipitate the hydrolysate with pfatinic
chloride but when I came to it I found, to my dismay, the bottle of platinic
chloride empty. With the shortage of chemicals my efforts to get hold of sotne
platinic chloride failed, and so my hydrolysate just withered away. I followed
practically the same route which fed Warburg to the discovery of the pyridine
nucleotides.

One day a nice young American-born Hungarian, J. Swirbely, came to
Szeged to work with me. When I asked him what he knew he said he could
find out whether a substance contained Vitamin C. I stiff had a gram or so of
my hexuronic acicl. I gave it to him to test for vitaminic activity. I told him
that I expectrd he would fintf it identical with Vitamin C. I always had a
strong hunch that tflis was so but never had tested it. I was not acqonintcd
with animal tests in this field and the whole problem was, for me, too glam-
ourous, and Gtamins were, to my mind, theoretically uninteresting. "Vita-
min" means that one has to eat it. U'hat one has to eat is the first concern of
the chef, not the scientist.

11nyway, Swirbefy tested hexuronic acid. A full test took two months but
after one month the result was evident: hexuronic acid was Vitamin C.
We made no secret of this and finished the test which left no doubt about the
identity. So, we (Haworth and I) rebaptized hesuronic acid to "ascorbic
acid."

There we were. Ascorftic acid seemed medically most important but there
was none of it, and none of the available vegetable sources allowed big-scale
preparation. Adrenals mere not avaifable, in quantity, in Hungary. As it

         LOST IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY         9
happened, Szeged is the center of the paprika (red pepper) industry. Paprika
was not available at Cambridge. I once saw it on the market but the vendor
cautioned me that it was poisonous. One night we had fresh red pepper fo:-
supper. I did not feel like eating it and thought of a way out. Sutfdenfy it
occurred to me that this was practically the only plant I had never tested.
I tool< it to the laboratory and about midnight I knew that it was a treasure
chest of vitamin C, containing 2 mg per gram. A few weeks later I had kifo-
grams of crystalline Vitamin C which I distributed all over the world among
researchers who wanted to work on it. This soon made complete analysis
and synthesis possible. I received my Nobel prize partly for this work which
also led to another unexpected discovery. iThen I stiff had only impure but
highly concentrated solutions of ascorbic acid we tried my extracts in cases
of I-fenochs' Purpura. In scurvy there is a great capillary fragility causing
subcutaneous bleeding, so it seemed logical to try my extracts in purpura
(suf,cutaneous bleeding). They worked. When I had crystalline ascorbic acid
we tried it again, expecting a still stronger action. It did nothing. Evidently,
my impure estract contained an additional substance responsible for the
action. I guessed that it might be "ffavones" which did the trick. My guess
proved right. I isolated the flavones from "paprika" and they cured purpura.
I called tftis group ol suttstanccs Vitamin "P." I used the fetter I' because I
was nnt quite sure that it was a vitamin. The alphafpet was occupied only up
to F so there was ample time to eliminate "I"' without causing trouble if the
vitamin nature became disproved.

I fcft I had now enough experience for attacking some more complex
biological process, which could lead me closer to the understanding of fife.
I cf~ose muscle contraction. IVith its \-iolent physical, chemical, and dimen-
sional changes, muscle is an ideal material to study. If one embarks on such
a new fieId one usually does not know where to begin. There is one thing one
can always do, and this I did: repeat the work of old masters. I repeated what
W. Kiihrte did a hundred years earlier. I extracted my&n with strong
potassium chloride (KCI) and kept my eyes open. With my associate,
I. Bnnga, we observed that if the extraction xsas prolonged, a more stick,
extract was obtained without extracting much more protein. \Ve soon found
that this change was due to the appearance of a new protein "actin,"
isolated in a very elegant piece of work by my pupil, F. Strauf), while I
"crystallized" my&n. Myosin, evidently, was a contractile protein, but the
trouble was that in vitro it would do nothing. A contractile protein should
contract where-t-cr it is. So we made threads of the highly viscous new com-
plex of actin and myosin, "actomyosin, " and added boiled muscle juice. The
threads contracted. To see them contract for the first time, and to have
reproduced in vitro one of the oldest signs of life, motion, was perhaps the
most thriffing moment of my fife. A little cookery soon showed that what
made it contract was ATI' and ions. My conclusion, that muscle contraction
was essentially an interaction of actomyosin and RTP, was soon strongly
attacked, so I developed (later at Woods Hole) the method of glycerination,


10               SZENT-GYORGYI
and giycerinated (extracted with diluted glycerol at low temperature) the
psoas muscle of the rabbit. This method is now widely used for conservation
of biological material such as sperm. On addition of ATP, my glycerinated
muscle contracted, developing the same tension as it developed maximally
irr r&o. This satisfied me and I was sure that in a few weeks' time the whole
problem of muscle contraction would be cleared up, but ten years later I still
did not understand muscle, which made me conclude that something had to
be missing from our basic ideas, something that was essential for the under-
standing of energy transformation. So I left muscle to find what this some-
thing is. This took me, gradually, into my present field, that of electronic
dimensions and mobility.

As a temporary president of my university at Szeged, I tried to put into
action the ideas picked up in the west. I created an intense cultural life
among students which culminated in our producing Hamlet, and producing it
well. But my democratic ideas brought me more and more into conflict with
the rising tide of fascism. It was not I who went into politics. Politics came
into our lives and when books were burned and my Jewish friends were
prosecuted I had to say "yes" or "no." I said "no" and when later, during
World War II a group of leading Hungarians came, secretly, to me and asked
me to do something to save Hungary from Germany's grip, I went, under
cover of an alleged lecture, to Istanbul to get in touch with the British and
American diplomats to see what could be done. This was a risky undertaking,
for German-occupied territory had to be crossed and Istanbul was the spy-
ing center, with highly developed techniques, and I was a newcomer in this
business. I felt that I could be more useful if I did not go merely as a private
individual to Istanbul and took a chance. I went to our Prime Minister, Mr.
M. Kallay, and told him about my plans. Outwardly, Mr. Kallay was a
Nazi, but I suspected that he was a good Hungarian, waiting for his chance to
-bring his country over to the other side. My guess was right. Instead of hav-
ing me arrested he asked me to represent him and convey certain messages to
the Allies. In Istanbul I succeeded in getting in touch with the head of the
British Secret Service, making with him detailed plans which soon had the
blessing of London. What made these dealings exciting was that, till the end,
I could not know for certain whether I was dealing with the British, or the
German Secret Service. This I could only find out later, when crossing Ger-
man territory. Not being arrested on my return, I was finally sure that it was
the British to whom I had talked.

Unfortunately, the secret of my mission leaked out, and I could not set
up a secret wireless station which was essential for my plans. I was placed
under house arrest. Hitler demanded my delivery. Later, when he occupied
Hungary, I avoided final arrest by the Gestapo only by an inch, owing my
escape more to good luck than ability. Arrest would have meant a very pain-
ful death. Even my daughter had to go into hiding, an arrest warrant having
been issued also against her. Working against Hitler and living underground
was full of colors which were not always pleasant. I expected to be killed so I

          LOST IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY         11

wrote up my observations on muscle, which I did not want to be lost. I sent
them for publication in the Acta Scano!inavicu to my friend Hugo Theorell.
Not knowing where I was, he corroborated acceptance by wire, "care of
Swedish Legation, Budapest." Fate would have it that at that time I was
actually hiding at the Swedish Legation, and so Theorell's wire gave me
away. The Gestapo immediately searched the surrounding houses for sub-
terranean exits from the Swedish Legation, which served as a warning. Also,
a hint from a friendly German diplomat made it evident that arrest was
imminent. So Per Anger, the head of the Legation, smuggled me out in the
back of his car the next night. Shortly after, the Nazis broke into the Swedish
Legation, searched, robbed, and practically destroyed it. Then followed a
series of exciting situations shared by my wife. At the end, we had to part,
hiding together becoming too risky. Two of my hiding places were destroyed
by bombs shortly after I left them, and, in the end I could avoid arrest only
by hiding in the vicinity of the Soviet lines where the Gestapo did not dare to
come.

The profound disgust we felt for Nazism made us guilty of a fatal sin in
politics-wishful thinking. It made us believe that after Hitler was finished
all we had to do to bring on the great golden age of peace was to show good
will towards the Soviets. It is true that in the short communist period of
Hungary, after World War I, the Communists behaved very badly, but that
was long ago. A new world was to come. This was a most tragic error with
fatal consequences. From my hiding places I contacted Governor Horthy,
who was still the master of the situation. We met in secret, and I offered my
services as an envoy to the Allies to prepare Hungary's joining them. He
seemed to accept but when he noticed my friendly disposition towards the
Soviets he edged out of the room and I never saw him again. I can reproach
only myself for this failure. I should have taken Horthy's mentality into
account. He hated Russia and feared it.

Personally, I did not expect a better treatment from the Soviets than I
had expected from Hitler, having given my heavy golden Nobel Medal to
Finland when the Soviets declared war on her, and this medal meant more
than just gold. So I was not surprised when, after the "liberation" of Buda-
pest, a Soviet patrol, with an English-speaking major at its head, came
searching for me. I gave myself up. To my surprise the patrol did not come
to arrest me but to bring me to safety on Molotov's personal order. I refused
to go along, not wanting to leave my wife's big family in the very dangerous
situation then prevailing in the Capital. So the whole family was taken to
safety, while my wife and I were taken to Malinowski's headquarters where
we were fed back to life with utmost care and consideration. Later, I was
invited to Moscow where I spent two months and attended the Centennial
Celebration of the Academy, finishing up with a trip to Armenia.

I went to Moscow with the hope of seeing Stalin. What made me want to
meet him was the fact that the Soviet Army in Hungary behaved very
badly. Near my home town a Hungarian regiment laid down its arms, not


12               SZENT-GYORGYI
wanting to fight for Ilitler. The whole regiment was crowded into a small
prison where it was soon exterminated by typhus fever. In Budapest the ends
of streets were suddenly closed by Soviet soldiers and all the younger men
were herded together. Their documents were taken away, which wiped out
their identity. About 3040,000 men were arrested this way and then herded
to Czegled, a nearby camp where there was no food and poor sanitation.
Dysentery and typhoid began to decimate them. The screams could be heard
from long distances. Those who were left were herded into trains, the doors of
which were sealed; nobody knew where they went. We could not guess, at
that time, that these people were simply taken to Russia as slaves, the whole
transaction recaliing the darkest days of African slave trade. With our wish-
ful thinking we tried to find excuses for the Soviet atrocities. We even tried
to find excuses for the individual misbehavior of Soviet soldiers; war is a
beastly business, and makes beasts of men. So, I went to hloscow with the
hope of being able to tell Stalin what was going on in .Hungary, that we
Hungarians wanted to be friends with the Soviet but couldn't be if he did not
end this rule. I asked for an interview and was taken into the Foreign Office
before Mr. Decanozov, who had to find out what I wanted from Stalin. Mr.
Decanozov must have been a very high official because he was fater executed
together with Reria. He asked me what I wanted. I told him. His reaction
was unexpected: he began to shout. At this moment I felt that what I
thought to be the overzeal of local commanders was all planned in Moscow.
Going home, I still continued working for an understanding with the Soviets.
If we had to live toether, we had better understand each other. The Russian
people are a fine people whom one cannot help liking once one knows them.

I thought, also, to have another vocation: to help rebuild the devastated
culture of Hungary and save our leading intellectuals from starvation. I
could help only a limited number, so I started a new "Scientific Academy,"
and selected its members, 50 or 60. The Academy consisted, chiefly, of a
grocery store which was kept well-stocked and from which members of the
Academy could take what they needed, free of charge. A friend of mine
helped me finance this enterprise. He also helped me to establish a new school
of biochemical research. This was not easy, because, to find a potato in those
days was a full-time job, and if I wanted my associates to work I had to feed
them. My laboratory looked like a chick embryo with its great vitellinc sack.
It consisted of a big kitchen, led by my wife, and a laboratory, led by myself.

Personally, I had no complaints against the Soviet, who always gave me
the most distinguished treatment. In order to stock my "Academy" I needed
trucks and with my friend, the writer, L. Zilahy, we asked for trucks from
Marshall Voroshilov who readily complied. With these trucks we estahlished
a travel agency. In those days everybody wanted t.o get away from the
capital but there was no transportation. So, we could charge high prices for
taking people to the country, where, with the fares collected, we bought food
for the Academy.

In spite of the personal favours it became more and more difficult for me

        LOST IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY         13

to find excuses for the Soviet's behaviour, which I still did not understand,
One day I went to Switzerland to restore my health on my skis. The Soviet
Commander used my absence to get rid of my capitalist friend who financed
my laboratory and Academy. He was kidnapped. The next day the Commu-
nist papers brought out articlesabout him, saying that he stole money and ran
away. I was informed abont the real happeniIl~s and put in all my influence
to have my friend released. The aythorities miscalculated. If I had been in
Hungary I could have done nothing; At large, in Switzerland, I could call the
World's attention to what was going on in Hungary, and this would have
been a bad point in Moscow for our local Communist leaders. My wires to
the Prime Minister and the Communist Dictator left no doubt about my
determination. My friend was released, and given a passport to leave the
country, having "seen too much." To prevent a second kidnapping, my
wife accompanied him by car to Switzerland, hoping that the Soviet would
not risk touching her. In Switzerland I learned from my friend what was
going on behind the prison walls, which I could never find out at home. This
filled me with such profound disgust that I was unable to return. To go back
and resist the Soviet made no sense and accepting favours was impossible. So
I decided not to return. Eventually, I found my haven in Woods Hole, where
I am enabled, now, by American generosity, to work unhampered by any
other factor than my own personal limitations.

* * *

The sole general interest in this story is that it sheds a vivid light on the
turbulence of our days, showing the conflict between my scientific world and
prescientific surroundings which \vcre immiscible. Looking back gives me the
feeling of frustration. Resisting Ilitlcr, building academies, research schools,
living for years with a finger on the trigger instead of fingering test tubes-
and all this to see the part of the world I worked for trodden down as a
colony, and to see mankind on the brink of extinction. The idea of being
killed for my ideas never frightened me. At one time it even seemed natural.
But to have spent so much life and energy in vain is depressing, and I have to
ask myself, as so many other scientists must do: has research any sense?
Should science not be stopped till man reaches the maturity necessary to deal
with the forces which science creates, without the danger of self-destruction?
  In a way, the question has no sense, for scientific progress cannot lte
stopped. Human curiosity cannot be quenched. The question is, rather:
does scientific progress offer a way out. p To this question my answer is arl
emphatic "yes."

In the preamble, I have touched upon two facets of science, its ways of
thinking and the tools it creates. The danger of our days is that politics has
run away with the tools, lunl.ing the way of thinking behind. The forct&s
created by science can be handled only by the mentality which created them.
So if there is a way out it is not in suppressing, but in spreading science till
scientific thought becomes sufficiently strong to create its own world order.


14               SZENT-GYtiRGYI

It may be objected that human relations are not dominated by thoughts
but by morals, and science has no moral content. Morals are the simple pre-
scriptions which make living together possible. They have no intrinsic mean-
ing. It would make little sense to say to a tiger: "Thou shalt not kill," or
preach to a mouse: "Thou shalt not steal." But a human society cannot
exist without such rules.
  But is it true that science has no moral content? Is science not more than
just a method of thinking, tools, or a collection of data and books? Is science
not a living society? I think it is. To me, science, in the first place, is a society
of men, which knows no limits in time and space. I am living in such a com-
munity, in which Lavoisier and Newton are my daily companions; an Indian
or Chinese scientist is closer to me than my own milkman. The basic moral
rule of this society is simple: mutual respect, intellectual honesty, and good
will. So I think science does have its moral code which it offers as its third
facet on which a new world order can be built. Science has raised man from
stench'and dirt, liberated him from the miasmas which decimated him in
earlier times. It allows the bearing of children without fear. It has already
shown the possibility of a dignified life, the expectation of which it has greatly
extended. It is true, it has reduced man to a very modest place in Creation,
but, then, why not try to lift ourselves, accepting the responsibility for our
own fate? Why pull down one another, further poisoning our own atmos-
phere, showing how easily life can be wiped out? Science has opened endless
possibilities for expansion if we work together instead of snatching small
advantages from one another. Science has helped us to understand and mas-
ter Nature. Maybe it will help us to understand and master ourselves, creat-
ing an elevated new form of human life, the wealth and beauty of which can-
not be pictured today by the keenest imagination.

