WATER QUALITY--Guidelines on Collection of Ground Water Samples for Analysis of Organic Compounds

In Reply Refer To:                            March 21, 1983
EGS-Mail Stop 412



QUALITY OF WATER BRANCH TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM NO. 83.12.

Subject: WATER QUALITY--Guidelines on Collection of Ground 
         Water Samples for Analysis of Organic Compounds

In recent years, the Water Resources Division has witnessed a 
significant increase in the level of interest and concern, 
both among our cooperators and internally, regarding 
contamination of ground waters with manmade organic 
substances.

At the present time, there are no Geological Survey-approved 
standard methods for collecting ground-water samples where 
the constituents of interest are manmade organic compounds 
and, indeed, it appears that much additional research and 
practical field experience is needed before acceptable 
methods are established and described in approved Techniques 
of Water Resources Investigations (TWRI) format. The 
materials used in casings, sampling devices, and containers 
must be tested for contamination or adsorption effects; 
quality-assurance procedures need to be developed and 
implemented; for some constituents at some concentrations, 
new approaches to sampling may be needed and some are being 
studied and tested at the present time.

It is anticipated that much of the research needed to develop 
or improve and test methods of sample collection will be 
performed at research sites supported by the Toxic Waste--
Ground Water Contamination thrust program, and it is hoped 
that each project leader will be conscious of the need to 
design into each project experiments which evaluate the 
integrity of the sample collection and handling procedures. 
Research performed elsewhere and reported in the open 
literature will also add to the technology of ground-water 
sampling in coming years.

For the time being, in the absence of approved Survey 
methods, the Quality of Water Branch, with the assistance of 
the Toxic Waste Program Coordinator, will periodically 
distribute to the field offices publications, committee 
reports, or citations of literature articles dealing with 
this subject. These materials, we hope, will provide 
satisfactory interim guidance to personnel engaged in data 
collection and interpretive work 1n ground-water resources. 
In addition, the Quality of Water Branch and the Office of 
Hazardous Waste Hydrology will assist, if needed, in the 
design of ground-water sampling programs.

In March 1982, the New Jersey District circulated a 
questionnaire to several persons within the Division with 
experience in ground-water sampling to obtain information 
that would assist them in design of sampling programs and in 
making the most appropriate choices for materials and methods 
to use, based on the current state of knowledge. The Organic 
Substances Task Group, an advisory committee of the Quality 
of Water Branch with membership from the laboratories, the 
research program, the operational program, and the Branch,
also discussed the questionnaire at length and reported on 
those discussions on November 30, 1982. The portion of that 
report dealing with the questionnaire is attached for your 
information and guidance. In addition to providing 
preliminary guidance on materials and methods to use when 
various substances at various concentrations are sought or 
expected in ground waters, the report recommends the 
development of other equipment, analytical methods, and 
quality-assurance procedures. These recommendations are being 
considered at the present time.

For additional guidance, your attention is directed to the 
following publications:

Pettyjohn, R. A., Dunlap, W. J., Cosby, R. and Keeley, J. W., 
1981, Sampling ground water for organic contaminants. Ground 
Water, v. 19, no. 2, p. 180-189.

Scalf, M. R., McNabb, J. F., Dunlap, W. J. Cosby, R. L., and 
Fryberger, J., 1981, Manual of ground-water sampling 
procedures: National Water Well Association, Worthington, 
Ohio, 93 p.

Gibbs, J. P., Schuller, R. M., and Griffin, R. A., 1981, 
Procedures for the collection of representative water quality 
data from monitoring wells: Cooperative Ground Water Report 
No. 7, Illinois State Water Survey, Champaign, Illinois.

Dunlap, W. J., McNabb, J. F., Scalf, M. R., and Cosby, R. L., 
1977, Sampling for organic chemicals and microorganisms in 
the subsurface: USEPA-60O/2-77-176, 26 p.

Also, the following articles in the winter 1983 issue of 
Ground Water Monitoring Review are of particular value.

Voytek, J. E., Jr., Considerations in the design and 
installation of monitoring wells, p. 70-71.

Rinaldo-Lee, M. B., Small- vs. large-diameter monitoring 
wells, p. 72-75.

Johnson, T. L., A comparison of well nests vs. single-well 
completions, p. 76-78.

Cadwgan, R. M., Barvenik, M. J., Ehrenfried, A. D., and 
Ullinskey, G., Improving monitoring efficiency of deep wells, 
p 110-118.

Wilson, L. G., Monitoring in the vadose zone: Part III, 
p. 155-166.



                                   R. J. Pickering

Attachment

WRD Distribution: A, B, FO, PO

Key Words: Water quality, sampling, organic compounds, ground 
water, toxic waste.

This memorandum does not supercede any previous memorandum.




GUIDELINES ON SAMPLING GROUND WATER FOR ORGANIC COMPOUNDS

The following discussion resulted from the deliberations of 
the Task Group over a questionaire prepared by the New Jersey 
District about March, 1982 and circulated to several 
researchers and district project personnel with experience in 
sampling ground waters from production and observation wells. 
A copy of the questionaire is attached for reference.

The Task Group found that many of the questions could be 
answered only in the context of the project objectives or the 
local hydrologic conditions, but that several reflected a 
genuine lack of knowledge and techniques within the Division 
regarding materials and methods to use in obtaining samples 
of ground water for organic compound analysis. In particular, 
there is a need for l) well-designed devices to sample 
purgeable and non-purgeable organic compounds and 2) 
documentation of casing and sampler materials and sampling 
techniques specific for compounds of interest under different 
hydrologic conditions.

The discussion begins with general guidelines based on the 
collective experience of the Task Group members, followed by 
answers to the questions presented by New Jersey and closes 
with recommendations for action or studies which should be 
considered to improve Division practices in this area.

PURGEABLES

o General Discussion

Purgeable organic compounds are operationally defined as 
those having <2% solubility by weight in water and boiling 
points <l50 C. These include low molecular weight 
hydrocarbons such as methane as well as freon, 
trihalomethanes and methylene chloride, among others.

The purgeables tend to degas in any open system, both within 
the well itself and within the sampling apparatus. Moreover, 
evolution of any other gas such as C02 or methane will strip 
purgeables from solution. Unless both the well and the 
sampling device are sealed and the sample container remains 
sealed until the analysis is complete, the value obtained 
will not accurately reflect conditions in the aquifer at time 
of sampling.

Few wells that are properly constructed for either production 
or observation purposes are sealed and gas-tight. Many water-
well codes specifically require that high-capacity wells be 
vented to prevent a partial vacuum occurring during drawdown. 
Similarly, small-diameter observation wells are typically 
vented to permit the water level in the well to change with 
that in the aquifer. In non-flowing wells, there is a free-
water surface across which gas exchange can occur. However, 
if the water surface is higher than the screened interval, 
the gas pressure in the well bore adjacent to the screened or 
open interval is equal (we believe) to the gas pressure in 
the aquifer. The objective in sampling is to obtain a sample 
from this interval.

If there are dissolved gases in the sample at depth that 
would exolve at atmospheric pressure, they would do so unless 
the pressure in the sample container is prevented from 
equilibrating with the atmosphere. At present there are no 
sampling systems available which hold the sample sealed from 
collection through analysis, but a slight modification to one 
sampling system, the Fisher Tube, can be made to enable it to 
mate with a Grob Closed Loop stripping apparatus in the 
laboratory such that a seal is maintained. Such a 
modification is recommended. The development of a sealed 
down-hole sampler is also recommended.

Consideration is being given to the development of a down-
hole device, a prototype of which has been tested by Pankow 
at the Oregon Graduate Center, which draws water over a Tenax 
resin and extracts the purgeables as well as some others. The 
major doubts about this device are that l) since it would 
have to be small to accomodate a 1-2 inch diameter 
observation well, the Tenax may sorb enough materials to 
alter its sorptive properties during sampling and 2) Tenax 
may not sorb low molecular weight hydrocarbons efficiently. 
The device must be tested thoroughly to guard against these 
potential shortcomings

Moreover, the device may not prove to be suitable in wells 
that contain more than one fluid phase. It may not be 
suitable for most production wells because physical access to 
the well bore is usually prevented by the presence of the 
pump. It may prove feasible to use the device above ground 
with some adaptation. However, in this case, many of the 
technique's advantages over more conventional methods may be 
lost. It is not likely that a single sampling method will 
emerge in the near future that will be suitable for all 
analytes under all field sampling situations.

o Sample Collection

In the absence of a completely sealed down-hole sampling 
device, the preferred method is as follows: l) using a 
submersible pump, at slow speed to avoid cavitation, fill a 
Fisher Tube (equipped with a stopcock at both ends) from the 
bottom to overflowing, close the lower cock then the upper; 
2) with a sealed production well, run a tube off the tap on 
the well casing and fill the Fisher Tube as described. The 
samples should be chilled and sent to the laboratory for 
analysis by the fastest route. The next best method is to 
fill a standard septum bottle to overflowing from the bottom, 
avoiding bubbles, seal, chill and ship.

The weakest part of the seal from sampling through analysis 
with the Fisher Tube is in the laboratory where presently, 
the tube must be opened to withdraw a sample for analysis. 
With the septum bottles it is at sampling where the bottle is 
considerably open to the air and the sample can be agitated 
during collection. Modification of the Fisher Tube to mate 
with a Closed Grob Loop should largely remove this drawback. 
Commercial gas sampling tubes made entirely of glass and 
Teflon are available with a septum for withdrawing small 
amounts of sample or injecting spikes.

o Pumping the Well

With an observation well, lower a submersible pump near the 
screen and pump for some time to develop the well. Monitor 
depth to water, specific conductance and temperature until it 
appears that hydraulic stability has been achieved. Then 
reduce the pumping rate and/or lower the pump. The depth to 
water will rise and the pump will collect water from the 
bearing zone.

With a production well, the observer has less control on the 
depth of pumping. But roughly equivalent control may be 
achieved as follows. Pump the well for some time to evacuate 
the casing; then shut the pump off briefly to allow the depth 
to water to rise, and turn the pump on, collecting a sample 
before the cone of depression fully develops again.

o Casing, Pipe and Pump Materials

The casing, pump and pipe should be galvanized, stainless or 
Teflon but not PVC. Hydrophobic sorption to PVC is extensive. 
Pipes should be cleaned with high pressure hot water before 
use and between wells.

NON-PURGEABLES

o General Discussion

The non-purgeable organic compounds may be further 
categorized as hydrophilic and hydrophobic, where compounds 
with octanol/water partition coefficients >100 are 
hydrophobic. The non-purgeables have molecular weights 
greater than phenol. Generally the toxicities of homologous 
series are positively correlated with molecular weights and 
octanol/water partition coefficients. The hydrophobic 
compounds are strongly but reversibly sorbed to surfaces so 
that cross-contamination through the sampling device is 
always possible and must be guarded against, and most will 
reside on suspended material if it is present.

Since the non-purgeables have little tendency to degas, there 
is no need for the sampling device to be sealed unless the 
analytes of interest are present in low concentrations and 
degraded by aerobic bacteria. Many priority pollutants are 
both. But there are a multitude of other mechanisms by which 
samples may be altered by casing, pumping, sampler and sample 
container that more than make up for the sampling problems 
avoided by low volatility.

o Casing Material

The casing material of choice depends upon the concentration 
and corrosive action of the organic compounds in the aquifer. 
The most corrosive materials are the solvents (TCE, methylene 
chloride) and the acids (acetic, formic and citric).

1. High concentrations of non-corrosive materials!

The term "high" implies elevated with respect to the 
potential for contamination from the casing. It is difficult 
to quantify by a single independent measure such as DOC since 
"high" will vary from compound-to-compound.

In this situation, the casing material can be most anything, 
even PVC, so long as the joining compound is used sparingly.

2. Low concentrations of anything!

It is absolutely essential that galvanized, copper or 
stainless be used. Casing and joints must be cleaned before 
being set with high-pressure hot water.

3. Corrosive materials!

Stainless, galvanized and copper have limited lifetimes when 
exposed to corrosive organic materials, particularly organic 
acids, which complex with the metals causing dissolution of 
the casing and accumulation of precipitate at the bottom of 
the well. In the injection wells in Florida for example, 
stainless casing are replaced every 5 years. In extremely 
corrosive environments, a fiberglass casing may be needed.

o Pipe and Pump Materials

1. High concentrations of anything!

The pipe and pump materials can be stainless, galvanized, 
copper, Teflon or PVC. The joining compound should be used 
sparingly and the pumping system should be used on more than 
one well only with great caution. In cases of severe 
contamination, a pumping system should be dedicated to one 
well or, at most, wells showing comparable levels of 
contamination. Do not clean the system after use; no 
procedure is fully effective. But considerable pumping time 
should be allowed at each sampling to equilibrate the system 
with the water to be sampled.

One obvious precaution when sampling a production well is to 
avoid oil-lubricated pumps wherever possible. Where one 
cannot be avoided, check on the oil consumption rate and 
check for oil standing on the water with a measuring tape.

2. Low concentrations of anything!

Stainless and galvanized are the best materials followed by 
Teflon. The sorptive properties of Teflon make it less 
desirable, especially when small diameter tubing is used. The 
name Teflon applies to a number of chemically distinct 
products that vary in important chemical and physical 
properties. Some kinds of Teflon are more suitable than 
others. The high surface to volume ratio of smaller tubing 
(<1/2 inch) increases the probability of significant sorption 
of hydrophobic materials over that of larger tubing.

PVC and polyethylene should not be used in any case. Any 
plastic will leach phthalates and an assortment of other 
materials, and act as strong hydrophobic sorbants.

o Sample Collection, Sample Containers and Preservation

The methods for pumping an observation or production well 
described for sampling the purgeables are satisfactory for 
sampling non-purgeables as well. The methods are the best we 
have seen to date at isolating water fresh from the bearing 
zone and minimizing the fraction of old or dead water 
sampled.

Where hydrophobic constituents are sought or anticipated and 
suspended sediment appears in the sample, it would be 
advisable to filter the sample through 0.45u silver membrane 
filter and submit the filter for analysis.

The sample container should always be glass baked at 
450-500 C. Baking forms a relatively non-reactive surface 
which minimizes sorption. Avoid plastic or acid-washed glass. 
Caps should be lined with aluminum foil, dull side in (the 
shiny side is coated with an organic compound). Teflon caps 
(as in the septum bottles) are satisfactory but contact with 
the cap should be minimized by standing the bottle upright 
during transit.

No method of preservation is completely satisfactory but none 
has been found better than chilling. Where biodegradation is 
possible, the bottle should be topped. Samples should be 
shipped chilled by the fastest route and analyzed as quickly 
as possible.

Some workers have observed two or more phases in water 
samples from highly contaminated wells. If multiple phases 
are present in the aquifer, sample collection and data 
interpretation are complicated. First, the pumping rates and 
the locations of screens will affect the mix of phases in the 
sample. Secondly, the analysis of mixed phases is custom and 
the analytical values have little meaning with respect to 
concentrations in the aquifer. For the present, when mixed 
phases appear in a sample, the phases would be separated in 
the field service units to avoid changes in transit, and the 
phases analysed separately. The interpretation of the data 
must be left to the observer. For example, an immiscible 
phase separated out in the field will probably contain 
compounds that would have been in the water or suspended 
material in the absence of the immiscible phase. Decisions 
regarding the treatment of such data must be left to the 
judgement of the researcher. However, guidelines on methods 
for handling immiscible fluids in the field should be 
developed and made available to the Division.

Responses to Questions

1. Which type of well is preferable, production or 
observation?

Neither is preferable either from a hydrologic or a chemical 
viewpoint. The objectives of the study may dictate the 
spatial representativeness of water from a well which, in 
turn, will constrain the pumping rate. Sample contamination 
depends largely on the casing, pipe and pump materials used.

2. Well design characteristics?

The general rule to avoid multiply-screened wells wherever 
possible applies here. The mix of waters drawn from the 
various bearing zones of a multiplyscreened well depends on 
the rate of pumping and a number of other variables in a 
complex and undefinable way, sufficient to obscure the 
vertical definition of aquifer characteristics.

3. Sampling strategies in consolidated versus unconsolidated 
formations?

The question must be addressed at the local level in an 
analysis of the hydrologic conditions.

4. Are submersible pumps preferred?

Not necessarily but they are handy to use subject to the 
comments of the general discussion.

5. Experience with the Johnson-Keck submersible pump?

Tennessee used this pump in a study of a contaminated 
aquifer. It is stainless with either Viton or EPDM stator and 
rotor, compact, cleanable with solvents and autoclavable. 
Teflon stators and rotors may be available in the near 
future. This should be a good pump for use where low levels 
of contaminants are being studied. The pump was purchased by 
HIF and is being fieldtested in Maine. The cleanup procedure 
where hydrophobic materials are encountered would include an 
alkaline detergent scrub, hot water rinse, methylene chloride 
rinse and an alcohol rinse.

6. Location of submersible pump? Surface skimming?

See the procedure described for sampling purgeable organic 
compounds.

Regarding sampling surface skims, see the general comments 
under nonpurgeable compounds, mixed phases.

7. Use of a thief sampler?

The discussion has assumed use of submersible pumps because 
of their convenience. But a thief sampler may be the best 
device to use for low capacity observation wells. The casing 
should be evacuated with a bailer, air-lift or submersible. 
After the water level has recovered, drop the thief to the 
midpoint of the screen or below the top of the water, 
whichever is deeper. A thief is less desirable than a 
submersible for taking a sample for the purgeable compounds 
because the sampler must be opened to withdraw the sample.

8. Evidence for removal of "dead" water?

None of the parameters that an observer may monitor is a 
reliable measure of the removal of dead water. The 
mechanistic approach described for sampling the purgeable 
compounds is the best.

9. Flow rate for sampling observation wells?

There is no universally appropriate flow rate. The rate of 
choice depends upon the characteristics of the well and the 
bearing zone. See the general discussion.

9a. Sampling from oil-lubricated production wells?

Obviously, sampling from water-lubricated wells is 
preferable. Where use of an oil lubricated pump cannot be 
avoided, the observer should be aware of the condition of the 
seals and the material used in them. Butyl rubber leaches 
PNA's and other hydrophobic materials. One may expect 
contamination from the seals and oil to include parafins, 
polyolefins, plasticizers and halogenated biphenyls. 
Contamination from purgeable materials is of less concern.

10. Pipe, pump and casing materials?

See general comments.

11. Is PVC acceptable?

PVC can be used only where concentrations of the compounds of 
interest are high, well above the levels potentially leached 
from the PVC. See general comments.

12. Contamination from a PVC pumping system?

Generally, PVC is not acceptible for use on the pumping 
system. The hydrophobic materials strongly but reversibly 
sorb and there is always a question about the effectiveness 
of cleanup between samplings.

13. Line pressure affecting adsorption by PVC?

Fast flow rates minimize contact but one cannot be certain 
that hydrophobic compounds do not sorb and desorb under even 
the highest flow rates.

14. Solvent attack of PVC?

An article in a recent issue of Ground Water discussed 
materials to use for sampling. The authors recommended in 
order of preference; stainless> Teflon> glass> PVC. We think 
galvanized is nearly as good as stainless. They also did some 
experiments on leaching of PVC and other polyvinyl plastics 
by solvents. Generally, stainless and galvanized are 
resistant to attack by solvents but PVC is not. When there is 
any leaching at all, the level of contamination is always 
uncertain.

15. Replacement of PVC tubing?

See general comments.

16. Sampling for purgeable compounds?

See general comments.

17. Temperature effects on the septum bottles?

Gas losses in a reaeration study are small unless an air 
bubble is introduced. But it is felt that the Fisher Tube is 
more reliably sealed than the septum bottle.

18. Permissible storage times for purgeables?

The presence of a gas bubble indicates loss of a purgeable 
compound to the gas phase, which cannot be sampled with the 
resent system. The absence of an air bubble does not 
guarantee against losses by other mechanisms. Presently the 
storage guideline is 14 days under refridgeration but samples 
should be analysed as soon as possible.

i9. Preparation of EPA reference samples?

The Task Group has no experience with the EPA vials of 
reference materials. But the following guidelines seem 
appropriate in lieu of specific instructions from EPA. The 
reference material comes in vials dissolved in methanol. Use 
a 25uL chromatographic syringe. Inject an appropriate volume 
at the bottom of the septum bottle (insert needle through the 
septum) or deep into the Fisher Tube from one end.

20. Rate of check sample flow to the lab?

One blank, one spike and one duplicate per shipment at least 
and additional combinations not to exceed 20% of the samples.

Blanks, spikes and duplicates sample provide needed 
assessment of the usefulness of any particular set of 
analyses but because of the rapidly changing capabilities and 
needs, and the likelihood of detecting substances not 
anticipated for which the sampling program was optimised, 
workers may frequently discover that the results are not good 
enough for a specific purpose. Although the general 
guidelines for spiked, blank and duplicate samples may be 
satisfactory for some purposes, the decision as to what is 
good enough ultimately rests with the data user.

RECOMMENDATIONS

1. The Central Laboratories should acquire Grob Closed Loop 
stripping devices and modify them as appropriate to mate with 
a Fisher Tube (also modified) and another device recommended 
below for development, to maintain a sealed sample from 
collection through analysis for the purgeable compounds.

2. A system for collecting and analysing water samples for 
purgeable organic compounds should be developed having the 
following features;

a. Can be lowered down the well. 
b. Will open, collect and seal while in the well. 
c. Can be shipped without opening to the laboratory.
d. Has a removable septum through which a spike or internal 
standard may be injected. 
e. The preferred material is glass; the sampler should be 
capable of being baked at 450-500 C. 
f. Will mate with a Grob Closed Loop stripping device in the 
laboratory.

3.  In addition to developing a down-hole sampler, the Fisher 
Tubes should be modified as follows:

a. Fitted with a removable septum through which a spike or 
   internal standard may be injected. 
b. Modified to mate with a Grob Closed Loop stripping device 
   in the laboratory such that the tube need not be opened to 
   the air to remove the sample.

4.  The downhole sampler and modified Fisher Tubes should be 
distributed by the Central Laboratories or HIF as part of a 
sampling kit that would include standards for injection into 
the sample in the field. The labs or HIF should also be 
responsible for cleaning and repairing the devices for reuse 
in the field.

5.  HIF and the Central Laboratories should develop a program 
to evaluate pumping systems and procedures for their use, 
including cleanup procedures. The more expensive pumping 
systems should be purchased by HIF and rented to the 
Districts.

6.  An assortment of mixed standards and surrogate internal 
standards for injection into samples in the field, and 
procedures for their use, should be developed by the 
Division. These materials would permit quality control 
procedures to be carried on from the point of sample 
collection.

7.  Procedures for sampling dissolved, solid and immiscible 
phases should be incorporated into a TWRI.




NEW JERSEY DISTRICT QUESTIONAIRE ON GROUNDWATER QUALITY 
SAMPLING

Questions pertaining to pumping a well:

1.  Which type of well (production or observation) is 
considered preferable in a trace organics sampling program 
for VOC's, phenols, phthalate esters, etc. ?

2.  How does the design of the well (casing construction, 
location of screened interval, multiple screens) af#ect the 
suitability of that well for sampling metals and trace 
organics (compounds with varying degrees of solubility)?

3.  How does the sampling strategy differ in a consolidated 
(rock) system vs. an unconsolidated (coastal plain) system?

4.  Is a submersible pump the pre#erred type of pump to be 
used whenever possible in sampling an observation well? 
Should the use of gas - reciprocal pumps be limited to small 
diameter observation wells?

5.  Have you had any experience with the Johnson-Keck 
(1.75" O.D.) submersible pump?

6.  Should the submersible pump be located near the pumping 
head during sampling, or should it be located nearer to the 
screened interval? Is there ever any value in skimming the 
surface water in a well to collect certain organic 
substances?

7.  Should a thief sampler be located at the screened 
interval and an appropriate sample be taken from it instead 
of at land surface? If so, what type of sampler would be 
suitable, and when should it be used? Should such a sampler 
be dedicated to only one site?

8.  What is considered sufficient evidence of the evacuation 
of "dead water" from the casing of a pumped observation well? 
Should we monitor temperature, pH, and specific conductance 
during the pumping process until stability is achieved? Are 
there any other parameters that should be included in this 
monitoring scheme? Is it.valid to simply evacuate a certain 
number of casing volumes prior to collection regardless of 
field parameter stability?

9.  What is considered a minimum flow rate necessary to 
correctly sample an abandoned production well or observation 
well? Could this rate be dependent on a minimum velocity of 
flow within the casing? What kind of effect does deteriorated 
or seldom used casing have on sample quality? Should we 
question the use of seldom used production wells in an 
organics sampling network?

9a.  Is there a significant differencc between watcr and oil 
lubed production wells in terms of organic contamination from 
oil?

Questions pertaining to material construction:

10. What type of material is prefered in the construction of 
pumps and piping that transport sample water to land surface 
for the collection of metals and various trace organics 
samples? Is PVC tubing (flexibe) or PVC pipe (glue joint or 
threaded) considered acceptable? How about stainless steel or 
tin or teflon lined pipe?

11. If PVC is acceptable, would there be any preference in 
minimizing the length of tubing, where possible, that the 
sample would have to travel through to the point of 
collection?

12. How can we effectively demonstrate that our present 
pumping system (consisting of a Gould's submersible pump 1/3 
H.P., 200' of 3/4" I.D. flexible PVC (clear) tubing, and a 
rigid PVC pipe delivery system with pressure regulator) does 
not cross-contaminate samples? Should the system be flushed 
or cleansed with de-ionized water (or soap) between uses?

13. Does the line pressure in the PVC tubing have any effect 
on the adsorption of hydropholic organics onto the tubing? Do 
fluid velocity, residence time within the tubing, or the 
state of reactivity (pH) of the sample water have an effect 
on trace organics being transported through the system?

14. Sample water that contains organic solvents probably will 
attack PVC tubing, but under what conditions and at what 
concentrations? How can we know that such an attack has taken 
place? What types of compounds might be leached from the 
tubing? Would such damage to the tubing be permanent?

15. Should tubing be replaced on a regular basis? How would 
you determine the time interval? Would "food grade" PVC 
tubing be preferrable to "non-food grade", and why?

Other related questions:                                                

16. Are VOC vials the most effective collection and storage 
vessel for a VOC sample? We suspect that manufacturing 
defects which cause irregularities at the opening of the 
vial can cause an imperfect seal with the teflon membrane. 
To what extent is this a problem? Can significant defects be 
visually observed? Do the resultant air bubbles invalidate 
the sample?

17. What about the effects of temperature change 
(particularly in the 1! - 4 C range, where the density of 
water changes dramatically) on the integrity or the VOC 
sample? Can such temperature changes induce air/water flow 
around or possibly through the membrane?

18. How long can a refrigerated VOC sample be stored prior to 
analysis? Is the absence of an air bubble an adequate 
indicator of sample integrity?

19. What is the proper analytical proceedure and equipment 
needed to prepare EPA standard rcference samples (from vials 
of trihalomethanes) for VOC's in the field? Do we mix the 
sample in an open Cantainer before pouring into vials? Is the 
system even useful in developing check samples in the field? 
Should we use micro-syringeg for measuring the buffer stock 
and Type 1 reagent grade water for dilution? How would we, on 
the district level, quality assure this preceedure?

20. How often should VOC check samples (spiked and blank) be 
sent to the central laboratory? How would these samples, and 
the results obtained from this effort be merged into the 
existing quality assurance program at the central laboratory?


