

Release:  92-128                                                                
September 1992

STS-47 FLIGHT MARKS JAPAN'S MAJOR FORAY INTO HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT


   The 50th Shuttle flight marks the first NASA mission devoted 
primarily to Japan.  Space Shuttle Endeavour will carry a crew of 
7, including a Japanese mission specialist, and Spacelab-J (SL-J) 
science laboratory into Earth orbit on the STS-47 mission.  SL-J 
contains 43 experiments, 34 provided by Japan, 7 from the United 
States and 2 joint experiments.  

   "Missions such as Spacelab J mirror the way science is done on 
Earth," said SL-J Program Scientist Dr. Robert S. Sokolowski.  
"Astronauts aboard the orbiting laboratory will conduct 
experiments around-the-clock.  These experiments will add to basic 
knowledge about the behavior of everything from crystals, fluids 
and even humans when exposed to the near weightless environment of 
spaceflight."

   Commander of the mission is Robert "Hoot" Gibson, making his 
fourth Shuttle flight.  Curtis Brown, making his first, is the 
pilot.  Making their second Shuttle flights are mission 
specialists Mark Lee and Jay Apt.  First time space travelers Jan 
Davis and Mae Jemison, the first African American woman to fly in 
space, round out the NASA crew.  

   Endeavour's crew also will include the first Japanese to fly 
aboard a NASA spacecraft, payload specialist Dr. Mamoru Mohri.

   STS-47 will be the second flight of NASA's newest Space 
Shuttle, Endeavour.  Scheduled for launch around Sept. 11, the 
mission is scheduled to last 6 days, 20 hours and 36 minutes.  At 
the end of its mission, Endeavour will land at the Kennedy Space 
Center, Fla.

SL-J Laboratory

   Spacelab is a 23-foot long pressurized laboratory built by the 
European Space Agency specifically for conducting experiments in a 
shirt-sleeve environment aboard the Space Shuttle.  

   "On Spacelab missions, astronauts do the science.   They have 
an essential role in the conduct of the experiments, both as 
investigators and as test subjects," said Gary W. McCollum, SL-J 
Program Manager.  "This mission is typical of how we will 
routinely work in space for much longer periods when Space Station 
Freedom begins operations later this decade."  

   Research conducted on Spacelab missions and later on Freedom 
offers unique opportunities to learn about basic scientific 
processes, which ultimately may lead to useful commercial and 
medical applications.

   But, the effects of microgravity on plants and animals, 
including humans, must be understood before long-term space travel 
and exploration missions can be undertaken.  

   "Our life sciences research seeks to distinguish the role 
gravity plays in the development and functions of life on Earth.  
We can study plants and animals -- including humans -- in the 
microgravity of space," said Dr. Thora Halstead, SL-J Program 
Scientist.  "With the overwhelming influence of gravity removed, 
basic physical processes can be studied more easily."  

   "This information is critical to keeping people healthy and 
productive on the space station and on long space missions to the 
planets,"  Halstead said.  "But the application of this knowledge 
has far-reaching benefits because some of what we learn on these 
missions will be useful to researchers studying medical problems 
on Earth."

Materials Science Experiments

   On Spacelab J, 24 experiments will study various materials and 
processes in the near absence of gravity.  This includes studies 
of protein crystals, electronic materials, fluids, glasses and 
ceramics, metals and alloys --   

   A frequent flier on Space Shuttle missions, the protein crystal 
growth experiment will make its 15th trip into space.  Proteins 
are building blocks of living organisms.  Understanding how 
proteins work could lead to new and improved medicines and foods.  

   Due to the forces of gravity, the internal structures of 
protein crystals grow imperfectly on Earth.  Absent of 
gravity-induced flaws, the internal structure of protein crystals 
grown in space can be studied on the ground more easily . 

   Returned to Earth and examined using powerful x-ray 
diffractometers and computers, these space-grown protein crystals 
reveal their molecular structure.  Understanding how proteins work 
could lead to new and improved medicines and protein-rich foods.  

   Semiconductors, an integral component of electronic devices 
used in industrial and consumer products, are the focus of several 
materials experiments.  Six types of semiconductor crystals will 
be grown aboard Spacelab.

   In the miniature world of semiconductor chips, gravity-induced 
flaws in crystals can alter dramatically the performance of the 
chip.  With no gravity, researchers believe they can grow crystals 
of unparalleled quality and consistency.  This could eventually 
lead to improved semiconductors and superconductors and more 
efficient electronic components.

   Endeavour's crew also will conduct investigations on the 
behavior of mineral oil drops.  This is part of a continuing 
effort to identify the potential for processing materials without 
the need for containers that, like gravity, reduces the quality of 
the material processed.

   Other experiments will manufacture glass and a rare mineral 
compound called samarskite, which will test theories on material 
properties.  A series of 10 metals and alloys experiments will 
look into the ways that ingredients may be combined to form new, 
improved materials. 

Life Sciences Experiments

   The remaining 20 experiments are life science research.  Life 
science experiments include cell separation, cell biology, 
developmental biology, animal and human physiology and behavior, 
space radiation and biological rhythms.  

   Astronauts will separate mixtures of proteins using an 
electrical field as a way of obtaining purer proteins.  They will 
grow plant and animal cells to see how microgravity alters their 
development and to learn more about how they function.

   Frog eggs will be fertilized in space and examined at various 
stages of development -- from embryos to tadpoles to adults.  The 
influence of weightlessness on the stages of development and the 
behavior of the frogs will be determined.  Chicken embryos also 
will be flown to study how space flight alters the development of 
bones and other tissues.  

   Scientists will study the human body's motion and balance 
mechanisms and visual stability as altered by space flight.  
Endeavour's crew will be the test subjects.

   They also will participate in experiments to test the 
effectiveness of biofeedback to ward off space motion sickness.  
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) equipment will be used pre- and 
post-flight to measure muscle and bone loss due to space travel.

   A Japanese experiment will use two koi fish (carp) to study 
effects of weightlessness on a fish's gravity-sensing organ, which 
is very similar to the same organ in humans.  Effects of space 
cosmic radiation will be measured using fruit fly larvae and eggs. 

   A new piece of medical equipment to convert contaminated water 
into a sterile (glucose and saline) fluid for intravenous use will 
be tested.  This experiment is directed toward future medical care 
on Space Station Freedom.

   Several other experiments will be carried in the Shuttle 
middeck compartment.  Also a Getaway Special Bridge in the cargo 
bay will house 9 experiments.
                             - end -
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                   MEDIA SERVICES INFORMATION

NASA Select Television Transmission

   NASA Select television is available on Satcom F-2R, 
Transponder 13, located at 72 degrees west longitude; frequency 
3960.0 MHz, audio 6.8 MHz.

   The schedule for television transmissions from the Space 
Shuttle orbiter and for the mission briefings will be available 
during the mission at Kennedy Space Center, Fla; Marshall Space 
Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.; Ames-Dryden Flight Research 
Facility, Edwards, Calif.; Johnson Space Center, Houston and 
NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.  The television schedule 
will be updated to reflect changes dictated by mission 
operations.

   Television schedules also may be obtained by calling COMSTOR 
713/483-5817.  COMSTOR is a computer data base service requiring 
the use of a telephone modem.  A voice update of the television 
schedule is updated daily at noon eastern time.

Status Reports

   Status reports on countdown and mission progress, on-orbit 
activities and landing operations will be produced by the 
appropriate NASA news center.

Briefings

   A mission press briefing schedule will be issued prior to 
launch.  During the mission, change-of-shift briefings by the 
off-going flight director and the science team will occur at 
least once per day.  The updated NASA Select television schedule 
will indicate when mission briefings are planned.

                       STS-47 QUICK LOOK

Launch Date and Site:  Sept. 11, 1992, Kennedy Space Center, 
Fla., Pad 39A

Launch Window:         10:25 a.m. - 12:55 p.m. EDT

Orbiter:          Endeavour (OV-105)

Orbit:            163 n.m. x 163 n.m.; 57 degrees inclination

Landing Date/Time: 7:01 a.m. EDT Sept. 18, 1992

Primary Landing Site:  Kennedy Space Center, Fla.

Abort Landing Sites:   Return to Launch Site - Kennedy Space 
Center, Fla.
                  Transoceanic Abort Landing - Zaragoza, Spain; 
Ben
                       Guerir, Morroco; Moron, Spain
                  Abort Once Around - White Sands Space Harbor, 
N.M.

Crew:             Robert Gibson, Commander
                  Curtis Brown, Pilot
                  Mark Lee, Mission Specialist 1
                  Jay Apt, Mission Specialist 2
                  Jan Davis, Mission Specialist 3
                  Mae Jemison, Mission Specialist 4
                  Mamoru Mohri, Payload Specialist 1

Operational Shifts:    Red team  -- Brown, Lee, Mohri
                  Blue team -- Apt, Davis, Jemison

Cargo Bay Payloads:    Spacelab-J
                  GAS Bridge (Get-Away Specials)

Middeck Payloads: ISAIAH (Israel Space Agency Investigation 
About 
                       Hornets)
                  SSCE (Solid Surface Combustion Experiment)
                  SAREX-II (Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment-II)


SL-3 Mission Conf.    Shuttle

               STS-47 VEHICLE AND PAYLOAD WEIGHTS

                                                     Pounds

Orbiter (Endeavour) Empty and 3 SSMEs                173,174

Spacelab-J Module                                         21,861

Get-Away Specials Bridge                                  5,000

Israel Space Agency Investigation About Hornets                
70

Solid Surface Combustion Experiment                       253

Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment                     36

Detailed Supplementary Objectives                    51

Total Vehicle At SRB Ignition                                  
4,510,542

Orbiter Landing Weight                                    
219,247


                   SPACE SHUTTLE ABORT MODES

     Space Shuttle launch abort philosophy aims toward safe and 
intact recovery of the flight crew, orbiter and its payload.  
Abort modes include:

     * Abort-To-Orbit (ATO) -- Partial loss of main engine 
thrust late enough to permit reaching a minimal 105-nautical 
mile orbit with orbital maneuvering system engines.

     * Abort-Once-Around (AOA) -- Earlier main engine shutdown 
with the capability to allow one orbit around before landing at 
either Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.; White Sands Space Harbor, 
N.M; or the Shuttle Landing Facility (SLF) at the Kennedy Space 
Center, Fla.

     * Trans-Atlantic Abort Landing (TAL) -- Loss of one or more 
main engines midway through powered flight would force a landing 
at either Zaragoza, Spain; Ben Guerir, Morocco; or Moron, Spain.

    * Return-To-Launch-Site (RTLS) -- Early shutdown of one or 
more engines without enough energy to reach Zaragoza would 
result in a orbiter pitch around and thrust back toward KSC 
until within gliding distance of the SLF.

     STS-47 contingency landing sites are Edwards Air Force 
Base, the Kennedy Space Center, White Sands Space Harbor, 
Zaragoza, Ben Guerir and Moron.


            STS-47 TRAJECTORY SEQUENCE OF EVENTS


                                      RELATIVE
EVENT                  MET            VELOCITY  MACH ALTITUDE
                      (d:h:m:s)  (fps)               (ft)

Launch                 00/00:00:00

Begin Roll Maneuver         00/00:00:10    189       17        801

End Roll Maneuver      00/00:00:19    430       38        3,674

SSME Throttle Down 67% 00/00:00:32    765       69        10,663

SSME Throttle Up 104%  00/00:01:04    1,513     1.57      41,860

Maximum Dyn. Pressure  00/00:01:05    1,548     1.62      43,059
(Max Q)

SRB Separation              00/00:02:04    4,131     3.89      155,869

Main Engine Cutoff     00/00:08:34    25,000    21.61     376,708

Zero Thrust            00/00:08:40    25,000    N/A       376,909

ET Separation          00/00:08:52

OMS-2 Burn             00/00:36:12

Landing                06/20:36:00


Apogee, Perigee at MECO:     160 x 17 nautical miles

Apogee, Perigee post-OMS 2:  163 x 163 nautical miles


                  STS-47 PRE-LAUNCH PROCESSING

     KSC's Shuttle processing team began work to ready Endeavour 
for its second voyage into space on May 31 when the vehicle 
arrived at Orbiter Processing Facility bay 3 following its ferry 
flight back from California.

     Post-flight tests and evaluations were performed on 
Endeavour following its maiden voyage.  On July 14, the primary 
STS-47 payload, the Spacelab-J laboratory, was installed in 
Endeavour's payload bay while in the Orbiter Processing Facility 
(OPF0.  Interface verification tests between the orbiter and 
laboratory were conducted within the next few days.

     While in the OPF, technicians installed the three main 
engines in July. Engine 2026 is in the No. 1 position, Engine 
2022 is in the No. 2 position and Engine 2029 is in the No. 3 
position.

     After being readied for its second flight, Endeavour was 
transferred out of the OPF and towed several hundred yards to 
the Vehicle Assembly Building and connected to its external tank 
and solid rocket boosters.

     Meanwhile, solid rocket booster stacking activities 
commenced on June 11 and concluded in July.  The external tank 
was attached to the boosters on July 13.  Mobile launcher 
platform number 2 is being used for Endeavour's second flight.

     Technicians attached the 100-ton space plane to its already 
stacked solid rocket boosters and external tank.  Endeavour was  
transferred to pad 39-B.  The Terminal Countdown Demonstration 
Test with the STS-47 flight crew was completed.

     A standard 43-hour launch countdown is scheduled to begin 3 
days prior to launch.  During the countdown, the orbiter's fuel 
cell storage tanks and all orbiter systems will be prepared for 
flight.

     About 9 hours before launch, the external tank will be 
filled with its flight load of a half million gallons of liquid 
oxygen and liquid hydrogen propellants.  About 2 and one-half 
hours before liftoff, the flight crew will begin taking their 
assigned seats in the crew cabin.

     Endeavour's end-of-mission landing is planned at Kennedy 
Space Center's Shuttle Landing Facility.  KSC's landing and 
recovery team will perform normal convoy operations on the 
runway to safe the vehicle and prepare it for tow to the OPF.

     Endeavour's next flight, STS-54, is targeted for the end of 
the year.  The STS-54 crew aboard Endeavour will loft NASA's 
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-F into geosynchronous orbit.


                           SPACELAB-J

   Spacelab research offers unique opportunities to learn about 
basic scientific processes and the effects of space travel on 
humans in preparation for longer stays in space.  These 
opportunities ultimately may lead to useful commercial and 
medical applications on Earth.

   The Spacelab-J mission is a joint project in space-based 
research between the United States and Japan.  Within the 
spacelab, NASA will fly Japan's "First Materials Processing 
Test," a collection of 34 material- and life-science 
investigations, seven U.S. experiments, plus two collaborative 
experiments between the two agencies.  

   For Spacelab-J, the long module is used.  This self-contained 
23-foot-laboratory contains a series of equipment racks that 
hold furnaces, computer and biological workstations, biological 
incubators, storage lockers and other equipment to perform 
experiments in space.  Additional storage space and experiments 
are located in the orbiter crew cabin's mid-deck area.

                     SPACELAB-J EXPERIMENTS

   These experiments should provide scientists with a better 
understanding of fundamental materials and biological processes.  
There are 43 investigations, including 24 dedicated to materials 
science and 19 to life science research.

   The materials science experiments will explore five major 
areas -- biotechnology, electronic materials, fluid dynamics and 
transport phenomena, glasses and ceramics, and metals and 
alloys.

   The life science experiments include cell separation, cell 
biology, developmental biology, animal and human physiology and 
behavior, space radiation and biological rhythms.  A medical 
technology experiment also will be conducted.

                       MATERIALS SCIENCE

   Spacelab-J microgravity science experiments cover three 
research disciplines:  biotechnology, fluid dynamics and 
transport phenomena, and materials science.  Within these 
disciplines, the areas covered include:  protein crystal growth, 
electronic materials, fluid dynamics, glasses and ceramics, and 
metals and alloys.  One instrument will collect data on the 
microgravity environment aboard Spacelab.

Protein Crystal Growth

   This research field seeks to develop higher quality protein 
crystals than those developed on Earth and understand their 
internal crystalline order. 

Spacelab J art

Spacelab J art
   Protein crystals on the Spacelab-J mission are grown in two 
scientific instruments, each relying on a different technique to 
promote crystallization:  vapor diffusion and liquid/liquid 
diffusion. 

   Proteins are complex amino-acid compounds present in all life 
forms.  They perform numerous, critical roles in biochemical 
processes.  If scientists can determine how proteins work, new 
and improved medicines may be developed.  

   The functions of most organic molecules are determined by 
their three-dimensional structure.  If scientists can determine 
the structure of a protein, this knowledge may allow the 
development of new and improved medicine and synthetic products.

Electronic Materials

   In the electronic materials experiments, five kinds of 
semiconductor crystals will be grown using four specialized 
furnaces -- the gradient heating furnace, the image furnace, the 
crystal growth furnace and the continuous heating furnace.  
Semiconductors will be melted and solidified slowly to obtain 
high quality crystal.

   The resulting crystals will be returned to Earth for in-depth 
study and may lead to a better understanding of manufacturing 
similar crystals on Earth.  This eventually may lead to improved 
semiconductors and superconductors, and more efficient 
electronic components.

Fluid Dynamics and Transport Phenomena

   Fluid dynamics and transport phenomena experiments will study 
the underlying physics at work when fluids are subjected to 
different conditions under microgravity conditions.  

   Liquid drops will be levitated and manipulated using sound 
waves in the Drop Dynamics in Space and Interference with 
Acoustic Field experiment.

   Two other experiments -- the Study of Bubble Behavior and 
Marangoni-Induced Convection in Materials Processing Under 
Microgravity -- will study Marangoni convection, fluid movement 
caused by surface tension variations between regions of 
different temperatures.  

   On Earth, liquids are affected by buoyancy-driven convection.  
When a fluid is heated, lighter fluids rise and heavier fluids 
fall.  In microgravity, this is much weaker, allowing Marangoni 
or surface tension driven convection to be studied.  Marangoni 
convection is one of many phenomena that must be better 
understood for materials processing techniques to become more 
effective.

   Photography and videotape recordings will be important tools 
in documenting these and other experiments.  Such technology 
permits in-depth, frame-by-frame study of recordings of complex 
physics phenomena in laboratories back on Earth.

Glasses and Ceramics

   New types of glasses and ceramics also may be developed 
through containerless processing methods.  The Preparation of 
Optical Materials Used in Non-Visible Region experiment will 
create a non-silicone-based glass like that used in 
infrared-detecting devices such as telescope lenses.  

   This will be accomplished in an acoustic levitation furnace.  
This furnace uses sound waves to suspend, combine and melt 
ingredients in microgravity.  It will form a glass after 
cooling.  Containerless processing eliminates the possibility of 
introducing impurities, perhaps leading to glasses that will 
transmit more light. 

   The image furnace also will be used for two glass and 
ceramics experiments.  The High Temperature Behavior of Glass 
experiment will collect data on the physical processes behind 
glass melting.  The Growth of Samarskite Crystal in Microgravity 
will produce a rare mineral compound to better understand its 
properties and possible usefulness.

Metals and Alloys

   A series of ten metals and alloys experiments will study the 
ways that ingredients may be combined to form new, improved 
materials.  The large isothermal furnace will heat elements to a 
liquid state under various levels of pressure and cool them from 
the molten state to a useable solid.  

   On Earth, these processes are affected by gravity's pull.  In 
space, substances can be mixed with much more control as they 
float in a weightless condition.  The result is a more uniformly 
combined material with fewer impurities.

   The understanding of such processing may lead to lighter, 
more stress-resistant metals, as well as more uniform 
semiconductors and superconductors.  Such materials may have a 
broad range of uses -- from cars to computers to construction.  

   The Casting of Superconducting Filamentary Composite 
Materials and the Preparation of Nickel-Base Dispersion 
Strengthened Alloys experiments will contribute to this field of 
study.





Acceleration Data Collection 

   The Space Acceleration Measurement System will be used for 
the fourth time in Spacelab to collect data about acceleration 
forces experienced during the mission.  This system of three 
sensor heads will be located in the Spaclab-J module.  Such 
information will assist planners in developing scientific 
equipment and in placing sensitive experiments where they are 
least likely to be disturbed.

                         LIFE SCIENCES

   The effects of microgravity on plants and animals, including 
humans, must be understood before long-term space travel and 
exploration missions can be undertaken.  Life sciences research 
seeks to discover the effects of gravity versus microgravity 
environments on various life forms.

   With that information, researchers hope to correct or prevent 
adverse physiological effects that result from living and 
working in space and to develop new scientific information to 
improve life on Earth.

   Life sciences experiments aboard Spacelab J include:  cell 
biology, developmental biology, animal and human physiology and 
behavior, space radiation and biological rhythms.  One 
technology experiment in the medical field also will be 
conducted.

   Biotechnology Two biological experiments will separate 
biological sample mixtures, composed of several types of cells 
or proteins, into individual purified fractions consisting of a 
particular protein or cell-type using electrical fields.

Cell Biology

   Three cell culturing experiments will grow plant and animal 
cells to test the influence of gravity on development and 
function at the cellular level.  One such test will be the 
production of antibodies in space.  

Developmental Biology

   Other experiments in the life sciences will study how gravity 
affects the development of animals.  An experiment entitled 
Effects of Weightlessness on the Development of Amphibian Eggs 
Fertilized in Space will study the role of gravity in 
fertilization and development.  

   Female frogs will be carried aboard Spacelab J.  Their eggs 
will be fertilized during the flight and will develop in a 
microgravity environment.  Some eggs will be fixed at a certain 
point in their development, while others will be allowed to 
develop into tadpoles and adult frogs.  

Frog Art
   Another experiment to study the role of gravity on the early 
development of animals is The Effect of Low Gravity on Calcium 
Metabolism and Bone Formation.  This study will examine how 
microgravity affects calcium metabolism and bone formation in 
chick embryos.

Physiology

   Several experiments will examine the physiology of living 
organisms on this mission.  These experiments will reveal more 
about how organisms function in the space environment.  Several 
experiments will focus on the physiology of the 
vestibular-ocular system. 

   One experiment, The Comparative Measurement of Visual 
Stability in Earth and Cosmic Space, will study the effects of 
microgravity on visual stability.  This experiment will examine 
head and eye movements while the crew member visually tracks a 
flickering light target.  

   Another experiment designed to study the vestibular-ocular 
system is The Neurophysiological Study on Visuo-vestibular 
Control of Posture and Movement in Fish During Adaptation to 
Weightlessness.  

   In this experiment, two Japanese koi fish (carp) will be 
exposed to a varying light stimulus.  One fish will have its 
otolith structure removed.  The otolith is a gravity-sensing 
structure in the inner ear.  This fish's response will be 
compared to the other fish to identify differences in how each 
reacts to the same stimulus.

   Three crew members will participate in experiments on 
physical adaptation to space.  While awake, each will wear a 
special suit fitted with various sensors that monitor and record 
various physical responses.  Urine collection will gauge the 
intake and output of fluids, which shift toward the upper body 
in microgravity.

   Space motion sickness is an element of general Space 
Adaptation Syndrome that affects many space travelers.  A 
possible countermeasure for this will be studied in an 
experiment entitled The Autogenic Feedback Training Experiment:  
A Preventative Method for Space Motion Sickness; Autogenic 
Feedback Training for Vestibular Symptomology.

   This two-part experiment is a continuation from an experiment 
that flew on the Spacelab-3 mission.  On Spacelab J two crew 
members are participants in this experiment.

   One crew member will use biofeedback, a technique where one 
becomes aware of unconscious or involuntary bodily processes 
(such as heartbeat and skin temperature), in order to 
consciously control them.  The goal is to train astronauts to 
overcome the effects of space motion sickness without using 
artificial means, such as drugs.  

AFS-2 art

   The second participant, the control, has not been trained in 
biofeedback techniques.  But that participant's responses to 
similar circumstances will be recorded.  Data collected from the 
sensor suits they will wear also may help predict the likelihood 
of space motion sickness in future candidates for space travel.

   In space, muscles do not have to work as hard as they do 
under gravity's influence.  Bones do not receive the same stress 
that they do when under a gravitational field.  As a result, 
crew members from previous missions have lost calcium from bones 
and protein from muscles during flight.

   These losses could become a serious problem if crews spend 
many months or years in a microgravity environment.  Several 
experiments being flown aboard Spacelab J have been designed to 
study this problem.  These experiments will gather information 
about the process and extent of bone and muscle loss after 
exposure to space.  

   Two experiments will specifically study bone loss.  
Fertilized chicken eggs and rat bone cells will be examined 
after the mission for cartilage growth and bone formation. 

   To study how muscle mass is lost while in space, the Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (MRI) After Exposure to Microgravity 
experiment employs MRI to examine muscle and bone in selected 
crew members before and after the mission.

   MRI uses a magnetic field and radio waves to produce an image 
of the inside of the body, much better than conventional x-rays, 
but unlike conventional x-rays, it has no known health hazards.  
The MRI will allow investigators to examine calf and thigh 
muscles and to look for changes in spinal bone marrow and discs 
(vertebrae).

Radiation and Environmental Health

   An understanding of the radiation environment in space and 
the effects of radiation on life forms is critical before 
long-term space journeys are undertaken.  

   To examine the biological effects of space radiation, fruit 
fly larvae will be flown in special incubators exposed to the 
cosmic ray environment.  When the flies hatch, they will be 
examined for radiation-induced mutations. 

Technology Experiment

   When intravenous (IV) fluids are administered to a patient on 
Earth, gravity aids in their delivery and flow.   The absence of 
gravity presents a problem should such medical treatment be 
needed during a space mission.  Therefore, the Fluid Therapy 
System will be tested on Spacelab J.  The tests will examine the 
production of medicines and the administration of IV fluids in 
the absence of gravity.

                Spacelab-J Experiments Listing 

Sponsored by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Materials Sciences

Space Acceleration Measurement System
Dr. Richard DeLombard, Lewis Research Center, Cleveland

Fluid Therapy System:  Inflight Demonstration of the Space 
Station 
Freedom Health Maintenance Facility Fluid Therapy System
Dr. Charles Lloyd, Johnson Space Center, Houston

Magnetic Resonance Imaging After Exposure to Microgravity
Dr. Adrian LeBlanc, Methodist Hospital, Houston

Life Sciences

Protein Crystal Growth
Dr. Charles Bugg, University of Alabama, Birmingham

Autogenic Feedback Training Experiment:  A Preventative Method 
for Space Motion Sickness:  Autogenic Feedback Training for 
Vestibular Symptomology
Dr. Patricia Cowings, Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, 
Calif.

Bone Cell Growth and Mineralization in Microgravity
Dr. Nicole Partridge, St. Louis University Medical School, St. 
Louis

Affects of Weightlessness in the Development of Amphibian Eggs 
Fertilized in Space
Kenneth A. Souza, Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.

Lower Body Negative Pressure:  Countermeasure for Reducing 
Post-Flight Orthostatic Intolerance
Dr. John Charles, Johnson Space Flight Center, Houston

Plant Culture Research (Gravity, Chromosomes, and Organized 
Development in Aseptically Cultured Plant Cells)
Dr. Abraham Krikorian, State University of New York, Stony Brook

Magnetic Resonance Imaging After Exposure to Microgravity
Dr. Adrian LeBlanc, Methodist Hospital, Houston




From The National Space Development Agency of Japan

First Materials Processing Test -- 34 materials and life 
sciences experiments

Materials Sciences

Growth Experiment of Narrow Band-Gap Semiconductor Pb-Sn-Te 
Single Crystals in Space (M-1)
Dr. Tomoaki Yamada, Nippon Telegraph And Telephone Corp.

Growth of Pb-Sn-Te Single Crystal by Travelling Zone Method in 
Low Gravity (M-2)
Dr. Souhachi Iwai, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp.

Growth of Semiconductor Compound Single Crystal by Floating Zone 
Method (M-3)
Dr. Isao Nakatani, National Research Institute for Metals

Casting of Superconducting Filamentary Composite Materials (M-4)
Dr. Kazumasa Togano, National Research Institute for Metals

Formation Mechanism of Deoxidation Products in Iron Ingot 
Deoxidized With Two or Three Elements (M-5)
Dr. Akira Fukuzawa, National Research Institute for Metals

Preparation of Nickel Base Dispersion Strengthened Alloys (M-6)
Dr. Yuji Muramatsu, National Research Institute for Metals

Diffusion in Liquid State and Solidification of Binary System 
(M-7)
Dr. Takehiro Dan, National Research Institute for Metals

High Temperature Behavior of Glass (M-8)
Dr. Naohiro Soga, Kyoto University

Growth of Silicon Spherical Crystals and Surface Oxidation (M-9)
Dr. Tatau Nishinaga, University of Tokyo

Study on Solidification of Immiscible Alloy (M-10)
Dr. Akihiko Kamio, Tokyo Institute of Technology

Fabrication of Very-Low-Density, High-Stiffness Carbon 
Fiber/Aluminum Hybridized Composites (M-11)
Dr. Tomoo Suzuki, Tokyo Institute of Technology

Study on the Mechanisms of Liquid Phase Sintering (M-12)
Dr. Shiro Kohara, Science University of Tokyo



Fabrication of Sl-As-Te:Ni Ternary Amorphous Semiconductor in 
Microgravity Environment (M-13)
Dr. Yoshihiro Hamakawa, Osaka University

Gas-Evaporation in Low Gravity Field:  Congelation Mechanism of 
Metal Vapors (M-14)
Dr. Nobuhiko Wada, Nagoya University

Drop Dynamics in Space and Interference With Acoustic Field 
(M-15)
Dr. Tatsuo Yamanaka, National Aerospace Laboratory

Study of Bubble Behavior (M-16)
Dr. Hisao Azuma, National Aerospace Laboratory

Preparation of Optical Materials Used in Non-Visible Region 
(M-17)
Junji Hayakawa, Government Industrial Research Institute

Marangoni Induced Convection in Materials Processing Under 
Microgravity (M-18)
Dr. Shintaro Enya, Heavy Industries

Solidification of Eutectic System Alloys in Space (M-19)
Dr. Atsumi Ohno, Chiba Institute of Technology

Growth of Samarskite Crystal in Microgravity (M-20)
Dr. Shunji Takekawa, National Institute for Research in 
Inorganic Materials

Growth Experiment of Organic Metal Crystal in Low Gravity (M-21)
Dr. Hiroyuki Anzai, National Electorotechnical Laboratory

Crystal Growth of Compound Semi-conductors in a Low-Gravity 
Environment (M-22)
Dr. Masami Tatsumi, Sumitomo Electric Industries, Ltd.

Life Sciences

Endocrine and Metabolic Changes in Payload Specialist (L-1)
Dr. Hisao Seo, Nagoya University

Neurophysiological Study on Visuo-Vestibular Control of Posture 
and Movement in Fish During Adaptation to Weightlessness (L-2)
Dr. Masao Kuroda, Osaka University

Comparative Measurement of Visual Stability in Earth and Cosmic 
Space (L-4)
Dr. Kazuo Koga, Nagoya University

Crystal Growth of Enzymes in Low Gravity (L-5)
Dr. Yuhei Morita, Kyoto University

Studies on the Effects of Microgravity on the Ultrastructure and 
Functions of Cultured Mammalian Cells (L-6)
Dr. Atsushige Sato, Tokyo Medical and Dental University

The Effect of Low Gravity on Calcium Metabolism and Bone 
Formation (L-7)
Dr. Tatsuo Suda, Showa University

Separation of the Animal Cells and Cellular Organella by Means 
of Free Flow Electrophoresis (L-8)
Dr. Tokio Yamaguchi, Tokyo Medical and Dental University

Genetic Effects of HZE and Cosmic Radiation (L-9)
Dr. Mituo Ikenaga, Kyoto University

Space Research on Perceptual Motor Functions Under the Zero 
Gravity Condition (L-10)
Akira Tada, National Aerospace Laboratory

Study on the Biological Effect of Cosmic Radiation and the 
Development of Radiation Protection Technology (L-11)
Dr. Shunji Nagaoka, National Space Development Agency of Japan

Circadian Rhythm of Conidiation in Neurospora Crassa (L-12)
Dr. Yasuhiro Miyoshi, University of Shizuoka

             GET AWAY SPECIAL EXPERIMENTS ON STS-47

     Ten years ago, the first Get Away Special payload flew on 
Space Shuttle Columbia.  Since then, several hundred experiments 
have been carried out in space as part of NASA's Get Away 
Special (GAS) Program.

     GAS payloads from industry, educational institutions, 
domestic and foreign governments, as well as from individuals 
wanting to carry out scientific research on Shuttle flights have 
participated in the GAS program, managed by NASA's Goddard Space 
Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.  This program is offered to 
customers for a nominal fee on a space-available basis.  Clarke 
Prouty is GAS Mission Manager, and Larry Thomas provides 
customer support at Goddard.

     The GAS bridge, capable of holding a maximum of 12 
canisters, spans the payload bay of the orbiter and offers a 
convenient way of flying several canisters simultaneously.  Ten 
GAS payloads originally were scheduled to fly on this mission.  
However, one GAS payload cancelled because of technical 
difficulties.  To fill the bridge, three GAS ballast payloads 
will be used. 

     The most recent GAS payload flew on STS-45 in March 1992.  
To date, 78 GAS cans have flown on 18 missions.  GAS experiments 
from five countries are on this mission.  The countries 
represented are Sweden, France, Canada, England and the United 
States.  Brief descriptions of the payloads on STS-47 follow.

G-102 Sponsor:  Boy Scouts of America's Exploring Division (in 
cooperation with the TRW Systems Integration Group, Fairfax, 
Va.)

     In 1978, Explorer posts were invited to submit ideas for 
experiments.  This final flight complement of seven experiments 
was selected through a three-stage elimination process from 38 
proposals originally submitted.

     The seven experiments and their sponsors are:  Capillary 
Pumping developed by Explorer Post 9005 and sponsored by the 
McDonnell Douglas Corp., St. Louis, Mo.; Cosmic Ray developed by 
Explorer Ship 101 and sponsored by the American Legion of 
Bridgeport, Conn.; Crystal Growth developed by Explorer Post 310 
and Emulsions developed by Explorer Post 475, both sponsored by 
Chesebrough Pond's Research Laboratory, Trumbull, Conn.; Fiber 
Optics developed by Explorer Post 475 sponsored by the Naval 
Avionics Center, Indianapolis, Ind.; Floppy Disk developed by 
Explorer Post 1022 sponsored by the Church of Jesus Christ of 
Latter Day Saints, Columbia, Md.;  Fluid Droplets developed by 
Explorer Post 822 sponsored by Martin Marietta, Littleton, Colo; 
Command, Power and Mechanical Systems designed by Explorer Post 
1275 sponsored by the Goddard Explorer Club of NASA Goddard 
Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.  

G-255 Sponsor:  Kansas University Space Program, Lawrence, 
Kansas

     This payload contains three experiments based on the 
analysis of biochemistry structures in microgravity.  The 
payload uses a computer controller and an active thermal control 
system. The first experiment will crystalize enzymes.  The 
second will conduct research in cell formations.  In the third 
experiment, seeds will be used to test any effects that the 
space environment may have on seed germination rates.

     The Kansas University Space program is comprised of 
volunteer undergraduate engineering and science majors. 

G-300 Sponsor:  Matra Marconi Space/Laboratorie De Genie 
Electrique De Paris, Paris, France

     This is the first GAS payload to fly from France.  The 
objective of this experiment is to explore thermal conductivity 
of liquids in microgravity.  Measurements will be performed on 
three liquids:  distilled water (as a standard) and two silicone 
oils.  Using a modified "hot plate" method, a simplified guard 
ring reduces the heat losses. 

G-330 Sponsor:  Swedish Space Corporation, Solna, Sweden

     The scientific aim of this experiment is to study the 
breakdown of a planar solid/liquid interface when the growth 
rate increases from stable to unstable conditions.  To do this, 
a sample of Germanium doped with Gallium will be processed 
during the flight.  To perform the experiment, a gradient 
furnace was developed in which the growth rate can be controlled 
along the crystal.  The gradient furnace consists of a ceramic 
crucible with five heating elements and a cooler.

G-482 Sponsor:  Spar Aerospace Ltd., Quebec, Canada

     The purpose of this experiment is to compare the behavior 
of bread yeast in the absence of gravity to the behavior of 
bread yeast in normal atmospheric conditions.  The experiment 
mixes flour, water and the designated yeast on-orbit, allows the 
mixture to rise, and then "bakes" it.

G-520 Sponsor:  Ashford School, Kent, England

     This payload is the first British school experiment to fly 
in space.  The project won first-prize in a nationwide school 
competition run by Independent Television News (ITN).  Two 
experiments are part of this payload.  In the first, the 
students designed a small, leak-proof, transparent container 
filled with sodium silicate solution.  A few grams of cobalt 
nitrate crystals will be released into the center of the 
solution.  As soon as the crystals are dropped into the 
solution, a camera will record about 100 pictures for study on 
return to Earth.

     In the second experiment, a chemical solution is placed on 
a gel containing another compound, resulting in a series of 
rings appearing in the gel.  The resulting rings will be 
photographed by a second camera, taking 100 pictures of crystal 
growth at varying intervals over 4 days.

G-521 Sponsor:  Canadian Space Agency, Ottawa, Canada     

     This payload is called QUESTS (Queens's University 
Experiment on the Shuttle Transportation System) and includes 15 
furnaces.  Twelve of the furnaces are constant-temperature 
furnaces.  These furnaces will be used for studies of diffusion 
in metals when in the liquid state.  The other three furnaces 
are temperature-gradient, in which a uniform temperature 
gradient is applied along the sample, and the temperatures are 
slowly decreased to allow crystal growth to occur from one end 
of the sample.  

G-534 Sponsor:  NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland

     The objective of this experiment is to improve the 
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms that constitute 
nucleate pool boiling.  The experiment will investigate the heat 
transfer and vapor bubble dynamics associated with nucleation, 
bubble growth/collapse and subsequent motion. 
G-613 Sponsor:  University of Washington, Seattle

     This experiment -- an experimental cooling system -- was 
designed by University of Washington engineering students.  
Liquid droplets will be pumped from a shower head-like device to 
a spinning collection bowl that will substitute for gravity by 
acting as a centrifuge.  The rotating bowl will throw the 
weightless liquid to the edge and direct it into a collection 
pipe for reuse.  A smaller experiment, a micro heat pipe also 
will be flown in this canister.

        ISRAELI SPACE AGENCY INVESTIGATION ABOUT HORNETS

     The Israeli Space Agency Investigation About Hornets 
(ISAIAH) experiment will be carried on Endeavour's middeck to 
research the effect of weightlessness on combs built by oriental 
hornets.

     The oriental hornet has a unique ability to build combs in 
the direction of gravity.  Terrestrial studies using centrifugal 
force to simulate different directions of gravity other than 
Earth's gravity have shown that such forces are the only factor 
that determines the direction a comb is built.  ISAIAH is 
designed to obtain insight into this unique trait of the 
oriental hornet by testing the hornets' ability to orient their 
combs when in weightlessness.

     ISAIAH fits into one middeck locker and consists of two 
compartments.  A front compartment contains electronics, a 
blower, two tape recorders and front panel controls for the 
experiment.  A back compartment contains 18 test chambers of 
various shapes and a metronome.  Each of the nine top side 
chambers has a lamp to simulate day and night, an audio sensor 
and a food and water container.  Each of the bottom side 
chambers will remain in constant darkness when the experiment is 
inside the locker.

     Two lexan windows, one on the top and another on the 
bottom, will allow the crew to view and photograph the progress 
of the experiment.  ISAIAH is sponsored by the Israeli Space 
Agency.  The hardware was developed by Israel Aircraft 
Industries International, Inc.

                SHUTTLE AMATEUR RADIO EXPERIMENT

     The Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment (SAREX) is designed to 
demonstrate the feasibility of amateur shortwave radio contacts 
between the Space Shuttle crew and ground amateur radio 
operators, often called ham radio operators.  SAREX also serves 
as an educational opportunity for schools around the world to 
learn about space first hand by speaking directly to astronauts 
aboard the Shuttle via ham radio.  Contacts with certain schools 
are included in planning the mission.

     STS-47 crew members Jay Apt, call sign N5QWL, and Mamoru 
Mohri, call sign 7L2NJY, will operate SAREX.  Ham operators may 
communicate with the Shuttle using VHF FM voice transmissions 
and digital packet.  The primary voice frequencies to be used 
during STS-47 are 145.55 MHz for transmissions from the 
spacecraft to the ground and 144.95 MHz, 144.91 MHz and 144.97 
MHz for transmissions from the ground to the spacecraft.  
Digital packet will operate on 145.55 MHz for transmissions from 
the Shuttle to the ground and on 144.70 MHz for transmissions 
from the ground to the Shuttle.

     Equipment aboard Columbia will include a low-power, 
hand-held FM transceiver, spare batteries, headset, an antenna 
custom designed by NASA to fit in an orbiter window, an 
interface module and equipment cabinet.

     SAREX has flown previously on Shuttle missions STS-9, 
STS-51F, STS-35, STS-37, STS-45 and STS-50.  SAREX is a joint 
effort by NASA, the American Radio Relay League (ARRL), the 
Amateur Radio Satellite Corp. and the Johnson Space Center 
Amateur Radio Club.  Information about orbital elements, contact 
times, frequencies and crew operating times will be available 
from these groups during the mission and from amateur radio 
clubs at other NASA centers.

     Ham operators from the JSC club will be operating on HF 
frequencies, and the AARL (W1AW) will include SAREX information 
in its regular HF voice and Teletype bulletins.  The Goddard 
Space Flight Center Amateur Radio Club, Greenbelt, Md., will 
operate 24 hours a day during the mission, providing information 
on SAREX and retransmitting live Shuttle air-to-ground 
communications.  In addition, the NASA Public Affairs Office at 
the Johnson Space Center will have a SAREX information desk 
during the mission.



STS-47 SAREX Operating Frequencies

Location     Shuttle Transmission          Shuttle Reception

U.S., Africa      145.55 MHz               144.95 MHz
South America     145.55                   144.97
and Asia          145.55                   144.91

Europe       145.55 MHz               144.80 MHz
             145.55                   144.75
             145.55                   144.70

Goddard Amateur Radio Club Operations
(SAREX information and Shuttle audio broadcasts)

             3.860 MHz                7.185 MHz
             14.295 MHz               21.395 MHz
                                      28.395 MHz

   SAREX information also may be obtained from the Johnson Space 
Center computer bulletin board (JSC BBS), 8 N 1 1200 baud, at 
713/483-2500 and then type 62511.




              SOLID SURFACE COMBUSTION EXPERIMENT 

     The Solid Surface Combustion Experiment (SSCE) is a study 
of how flames spread in microgravity.  Comparing data on how 
flames spread in microgravity with knowledge of how flames 
spread on Earth may contribute to improvements in fire safety 
and control equipment.  This will be the fifth time SSCE has 
flown aboard the Shuttle.  Ultimately, plans call for SSCE to 
fly a total of eight times, testing the combustion of different 
materials under different atmospheric conditions.

     In the SSCE planned for STS-47/SL-J, scientists will test 
how flames spread along a instrumented filter paper sample in a 
test chamber containing 35% oxygen and 65% nitrogen at 1.5 
atmospheric pressure.

     During the four previous missions on which this experiment 
was flown, samples of the filter paper were burned in 
atmospheres with different levels of oxygen and pressure.  The 
filter paper and Plexiglas for later flights were chosen as test 
materials because extensive data bases already exist on the 
combustion of these materials in Earth's gravity.  Thus, 
combustion processed on Earth and in space can be readily 
compared.

     Scientists will use computer image enhancement techniques 
to analyze the film record of the Solid Surface Combustion 
Experiment.  They then will compare the enhanced images and 
recorded temperature and pressure data with a computer 
simulation of the flame spreading process.  Reconciling the two 
sets of data is expected to provide new insights into the basic 
process of combustion.

Robert A. Altenkirch             John M. Koudelka
Principal Investigator           Project Manager
Mississippi State University     NASA Lewis Research Center, 
Cleveland
                                     
             SPACE ACCELERATION MEASUREMENT (SAMS)

     The Space Acceleration Measurement System (SAMS) is 
designed to measure and record low-level acceleration that the 
Spacelab experiences during typical on-orbit activities.  The 
three SAMS sensor heads are mounted on or near experiments to 
measure the acceleration environment experienced by the research 
package.  The signals from these sensors are amplified, filtered 
and converted to digital data before it is stored on optical 
disks.

     For the first SL-J mission, the main unit of the Space 
Acceleration Measurement System will be mounted in the SMIDEX 
Rack of the Spacelab module, near the aft end of the module.  
Its three remote sensor heads will be mounted on the First 
Material Processing Test Modular Electronic Levitator, Life 
Science and Rack #9.

     SAMS flight hardware was designed and developed in-house by 
the NASA Lewis Research Center and Sverdrup Technology Inc. 
project team.

Charles Baugher                                    Richard 
DeLombard
Principal Investigator                            Project 
Manager
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center,      NASA Lewis Research 
Center,
Huntsville, Ala.                                      Cleveland



                    STS-47 CREW BIOGRAPHIES

     Robert L. Gibson, 45, Capt., USN, is Commander of Endeavour 
for mission STS-47.  Selected as an astronaut in January 1978, 
Gibson considers Lakewood, Calif., his hometown and will be 
making his fourth space flight.

     Gibson graduated from Huntington High School, Huntington, 
N.Y., in 1964 and received a bachelor's in aeronautical 
engineering from California Polytechnic State University in 
1969.

     Gibson first flew as pilot of STS-41B in February 1984, a 
mission that deployed two communications satellites and was the 
first flight of the Manned Maneuvering Unit, a spacewalker's jet 
backpack.  He next served as Commander of STS-61C in January 
1986, a mission during which the crew deployed a communications 
satellite and conducted various experiments in astrophysics and 
materials processing.  His third flight was Commander of STS-27, 
a Department of Defense-dedicated Shuttle mission in December 
1988.

     Gibson has been a private airplane pilot since age 17 and 
entered the Navy in 1969, flying combat missions in Southeast 
Asia from 1972-1975 and graduating from the Naval Test Pilot 
School in 1977.

     He has logged 442 hours in space and more than 4,600 hours 
flying time in more than 45 types of aircraft.

     Curtis L. Brown, Jr., 36, Major, USAF, will serve as Pilot.  
Selected as an astronaut in June 1987, Brown was born in 
Elizabethtown, N.C., and will be making his first space flight.

     Brown graduated from East Bladen High School in 
Elizabethtown in 1974 and received a bachelor's in electrical 
engineering from the Air Force Academy in 1978.

     Brown was commissioned in the Air Force in 1978 and 
graduated pilot training at McLaughlin Air Force Base, Del Rio, 
Texas, in 1979.  After completing training for the A-10 aircraft 
in January 1980, he began flying the A-10 at Myrtle Beach Air 
Force Base, S.C. 

     In 1982, he was assigned as an A-10 instructor at 
Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, Ariz.  In 1983, he attended the 
Air Force Fighter Weapons School at Nellis Air Force Base and 
returned to Davis-Monthan as an A-10 weapons and tactics 
instructor later that year. 

     In 1986, he graduated from the Air Force Test Pilot School 
and was serving as a test pilot in the A-10 and F-16 aircraft at 
Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., upon his selection by NASA.

     Brown has logged more than 3,100 hours flying time.

     Mark C. Lee, 40, Lt. Col., USAF, will be Mission Specialist 
1. Selected as an astronaut in May 1984, Lee considers Viroqua, 
Wis., his hometown and will be making his second space flight.

     Lee graduated from Viroqua High School in 1970, received a 
bachelor's in civil engineering from the Air Force Academy in 
1974 and received a master's in mechanical engineering from the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1980.

     Lee first flew as a mission specialist on STS-30 in May 
1989, a flight that deployed the Magellan planetary probe to map 
Venus.  Prior to joining NASA, Lee flew the F-4 aircraft at 
Okinawa Air Force Base, Japan, for 2 and a half years.  At the 
time of his selection as an astronaut, he was stationed at Hill 
Air Force Base flying the F-16 as Flight Commander of the 4th 
Tactical Fighter Squadron.  Lee has logged more than 2,750 
flying hours in T-38, F-4 and F-16 aircraft.  He has logged 97 
hours in space.

     Jay Apt, 43, will be Mission Specialist 2.  Selected as an 
astronaut in June 1985, Apt considers Pittsburgh, Pa., his 
hometown and will be making his second space flight.

     Apt graduated from Shady Side Academy in Pittsburgh in 
1967, received a bachelor's in physics from Harvard College in 
1971 and received a doctorate in physics from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology in 1976.

     Apt first flew on STS-37 in April 1991, a mission on which 
the Gamma Ray Observatory was deployed, and Apt performed two 
spacewalks.  Prior to selection as an astronaut, Apt served as a 
staff member of the Center for Earth and Planetary Physics at 
Harvard from 1976-1980 and as Assistant Director of Harvard's 
Division of Applied Sciences from 1978-1980. 

     Apt joined NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, 
Calif., in 1980 and served as Science Manager of the Table 
Mountain Observatory before becoming a payloads officer working 
in Johnson Space Center's Mission Control in 1982.  He was 
serving as a payloads officer at the time of his selection.

     An instrument-rated private pilot, Apt has logged more than 
2,500 flying hours in 25 types of aircraft, sailplanes and 
man-powered craft.  He has logged 143 hours in space, including 
almost 11 hours spacewalking.

     N. Jan Davis, 38, will be Mission Specialist 3.  Selected 
as an astronaut in June 1987, Davis considers Huntsville, Ala., 
her hometown and will be making her first space flight.

     Davis graduated from Huntsville High School in 1971, 
received a bachelor's in applied biology from the Georgia 
Institute of Technology in 1975, received a bachelor's in 
mechanical engineering from Auburn University in 1975, received 
a master's in mechanical engineering from the University of 
Alabama in Huntsville in 1983 and received a doctorate in 
mechanical engineering from the University of Alabama in 
Huntsville in 1985.

     Davis joined Texaco, Inc., in Bellaire, Texas, in 1977 as a 
petroleum engineer working in tertiary oil recovery.  In 1979, 
she joined NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville 
where she served as team leader in the Structural Analysis 
Division working on the structural analysis and verification of 
the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), the HST maintenance mission 
and the Advanced X-Ray Astrophysics Facility.  She later was 
assigned as the Lead Engineer for redesign of the Shuttle's 
solid rocket booster external tank attach ring after the STS-51L 
accident.

     As an astronaut, Davis' assignments have included technical 
support for development of the Tethered Satellite System mission 
and serving as spacecraft communicator in Mission Control for 
six Shuttle flights.

     Mae C. Jemison, 35, will be Mission Specialist 4.  Selected 
as an astronaut in June 1987, Jemison considers Chicago, Ill., 
her hometown and will be making her first spaceflight.

     Jemison graduated from Morgan Park High School in Chicago 
in 1973, received a bachelor's in chemical engineering from 
Stanford University in 1977 along with fulfilling requirements 
for a bachelor's in African and Afro-American studies and 
received a doctorate in medicine from Cornell University in 
1981.

     Jemison completed her internship at the Los Angeles 
County/University of Southern California Medical Center in July 
1982 and worked as a general practicioner with the INA/Ross Loos 
Medical Group in Los Angeles until December 1982. 

     From 1983-1985, she served as the Area Peace Corps Medical 
Officer for Sierra Leone and Liberia in West Africa, managing 
the health care delivery system for the Peace Corps and the U.S. 
Embassy.

     Jemison joined CIGNA Health Plans of California in October 
1985 and worked as a general practicioner and studied 
engineering in Los Angeles until her selection by NASA.

     Mamoru Mohri, 44, will be Payload Specialist 1.  Mohri was 
born in Yoichi-machi, Hokkaido, Japan and will be making his 
first space flight.

     Mohri was selected as a payload specialist for the National 
Space Development Agency of Japan (NASDA) in 1985.  He received 
an undergraduate degree from the Department of Chemistry at 
Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, Japan, in 1970, received a 
master's from Hokkaido University in 1972 and received a 
doctorate from South Australia State Flinders University, 
Australia, in 1976. 

     From 1975 until his selection by NASDA, Mohri served in 
various positions with the engineering faculty in the Department 
of Nuclear Engineering at Hokkaido University.  His major field 
of expertise is in surface physics and ultra-high vaccum 
science.  Mohri's current residence is in Matsudo-shi, Chiba, 
Japan.

                 MISSION MANAGEMENT FOR STS-47

NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.
Office of Space Flight
Jeremiah W. Pearson III -- Associate Administrator
Brian O'Connor -- Deputy Associate Administrator
Tom Utsman -- Director, Space Shuttle
Leonard Nicholson -- Manager, Space Shuttle
Brewster Shaw -- Deputy Manager, Space Shuttle

Office of Space Science And Applications
Dr. Lennard A. Fisk -- Associate Administrator
Alphonso V. Diaz -- Deputy Associate Administrator
Robert Benson -- Director, Flight Systems Division
Gary McCollum -- Program Manager
Joseph Alexander -- Acting Director, Life Sciences Division
Dr. Thora Halstead -- Program Scientist
Robert Rhome -- Director, Microgravity Division
Dr. Robert Sokolowski -- Program Scientist

Office of Commercial Programs
John G. Mannix -- Assistant Administrator
Richard H. Ott -- Director, Commercial Development Division
Garland C. Misener -- Chief, Flight Requirements and 
Accommodations
Ana M. Villamil -- Program Manager, Centers for the Commercial 
                           Development of Space



Office of Safety and Mission Quality
Col. Federick Gregory -- Associate Administrator 
Dr. Charles Pellerin, Jr. -- Deputy Associate Administrator 
Richard Perry -- Director, Programs Assurance 

National Space Development Agency of Japan
Yoshihiro Ishizawa -- Executive Director
Kazuhiko Yoneyama -- Deputy Director
Tadaaki Mochida -- Director, Space Experiment Group
Norio Soichi -- Project Manager
Dr. Yoshinori Fujimori -- Project Scientist

Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
Thomas J. Lee -- Director
Dr. J. Wayne Littles -- Deputy Director
J. Aubray King -- Mission Manager
Dr. Fred W. Leslie -- Mission Scientist

Ames Research Center, Moffett Field Calif.
Dr. Dale L. Compton -- Director
Victor L. Peterson -- Deputy Director
Dr. Joseph C. Sharp -- Director, Space Research

Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif.
Kenneth J. Szalai -- Director
T. G. Ayers -- Deputy Director
James R. Phelps -- Chief, Shuttle Support Office 

Kennedy Space Center, Fla.
Robert L. Crippen -- Director
James A. "Gene" Thomas -- Deputy Director
Jay F. Honeycutt -- Director, Shuttle Management and Operations
Robert B. Sieck -- Launch Director
John J. "Tip" Talone -- Endeavour Flow Director
J. Robert Lang -- Director, Vehicle Engineering
Al J. Parrish -- Director, Safety Reliability and Quality 
Assurance
John T. Conway -- Director, Payload Management and Operations
P. Thomas Breakfield -- Director, Shuttle Payload Operations
Joanne H. Morgan -- Director, Payload Project Management
Glenn E. Snyder -- STS-47 Payload Processing Manager

Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala.
Thomas J Lee -- Director
Dr. J Wayne Littles -- Deputy Director
Harry G. Craft -- Manager, Payload Projects Office
Aubray King -- Spacelab-J Mission Manager
Dr. Fred LesLie -- Spacelab-J Mission Scientist
Alexander A. McCool -- Manager, Shuttle Projects Office
Dr. George McDonough -- Director, Science and Engineering
James H. Ehl -- Director, Safety and Mission Assurance
Otto Goetz -- Manager, Space Shuttle Main Engine Project
Victor Keith Henson -- Manager, Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor 
Project
Cary H. Rutland -- Manager, Solid Rocket Booster Project
Parker Counts -- Manager, External Tank Project

Johnson Space Center, Houston
Aaron Cohen -- Director
Paul J. Weitz -- Acting Director
Daniel Germany -- Manager, Orbiter and GFE Projects
Donald Puddy -- Director, Flight Crew Operations
Eugene F. Kranz -- Director, Mission Operations
Henry O. Pohl -- Director, Engineering
Charles S. Harlan -- Director, Safety, Reliability and Quality 
Assurance

Stennis Space Center, Bay St. Louis, Miss.
Roy S. Estess -- Director
Gerald Smith -- Deputy Director
J. Harry Guin -- Director, Propulsion Test Operations
upcoming shuttle missions
previous shuttle missions

