Reducing Flood Losses Through the International Codes:  
Meeting the Requirements of the  National Flood Insurance Program

3rd Edition, 2008


Executive Summary	v
Acknowledgments	ix

1.	Introduction	1-1
	1.1	Purpose of This Guide	1-1
	1.2	The I-Codes and the NFIP	1-1
	1.3	Intended Audience	1-2
	1.4	Where to Get Help	1-2
	1.5	Purpose and Overview of the NFIP	1-3
	1.6	Overview of Community and State Responsibilities  
	Under the NFIP	1-4
	1.7	Benefits of Participating in the NFIP	1-7
	1.8	Implications of Not Participating in the NFIP	1-8
	1.9	FEMA’s Involvement with Model Codes and Standards  
	Producing Organizations	1-9
	1.10	ASCE 7:  Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other  
	Structures	1-10
	1.11	ASCE 24:  Flood-Resistant Design and Construction	1-10
	1.12	Flood-Resistant Materials	1-11
	1.13	Flood Elevations:  BFE and DFE	1-11

2.	Approaches to Floodplain Management	2-1
	2.1	The Comprehensive Approach	2-1
	2.2	Stand-Alone Floodplain Management Regulations Approach	2-2
	2.3	Building Code Approach	2-3
	2.4	Advantages of Reducing Flood Losses Through the I-Codes	2-4

3.	Implications of Adopting the I-Codes	3-1
	3.1	Development Other Than Buildings	3-1
	3.2	The Utility-Related I-Codes	3-2
	3.3	The NFIP?s Community Rating System and the I-Codes	3-5
	3.4	Considering Higher Standards	3-8
	3.5	Amending the I-Codes to Implement Higher Standards	3-9
	3.6	The Coastal A Zone	3-12
	3.7	Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage	3-14
	3.8	Historic Structures	3-18
	3.9	Critical and Essential Facilities	3-19
	3.10	Increased Cost of Compliance	3-22

4.	Community Responsibilities Under the NFIP	4-1
	4.1	Modifications of the I-Codes	4-1
	4.2	Regulate All Development	4-2
	4.3	Record Keeping	4-2
	4.4	Requiring Other Permits	4-3
	4.5	Notifying Potentially Impacted Parties	4-4
	4.6	Evaluating Floodway Impacts	4-5
	4.7	Flood Hazard Map-Related Duties	4-5
	4.8	Elevation Certificates	4-7
	4.9	Inspections	4-10
	4.10	Enforcement and Violations	4-12
	4.11	The Variance Process	4-13

5.	State Building Codes and Flood Provisions	5-1
	5.1	Meeting More Restrictive State Requirements	5-1
	5.2	State Amendments to the I-Codes	5-1
	5.3	Local Amendments to State Building Codes	5-2
	5.4	Exemptions from State Building Codes	5-2
	5.5	Direct State Regulation of Certain Activities or Buildings	5-3
	5.6	Referencing Flood Maps in the Building Codes	5-3

6.	Your Community's Approach	6-1
	6.1	Assessing Your Community’s Current Approach	6-1
	6.2	Modifying Your Community’s Approach	6-2


List of Tables, Figures, and Worksheets

Table 1-1	Summary of Selected Key NFIP Provisions,  
Code Citations, and Reference Documents	1-13
Table 3-1	Selected ASCE 24-05 Provisions and Opportunities for  
Community Rating System Credits	3-7
Table 3-2	Maximum Allowable Points for Higher Standards	3-9
Table 3-3	ASCE 24-05 Provisions Related to Critical Facilities	3-21
Figure 3-1	Schematic of Flood Hazard Zones in Coastal Areas	3-13
Figure 6-1	Approaches to Fulfilling the Requirements of the NFIP	6-3
Worksheet A	The NFIP and the I-Codes	6-4
Worksheet B	Assessing Your Community’s Approach	6-5
Worksheet C	Discussion Topics, Decision Steps	6-6

Appendices

Appendix A	References and Online Resources	A-1
Appendix B	Crosswalk of the NFIP Regulations to the  
Flood Resistance Provisions of the IBC	B-1
Appendix C	Crosswalk of the NFIP Regulations to the  
Flood Resistance Provisions of the IRC	C-1
Appendix D	Flood Resistance Provisions of the IMC, IPC,  
IFGC, IPSDC & IEBC	D-1
Appendix E	FEMA Regional Offices and NFIP State Coordinators	E-1
Appendix F	Sample Plan Review and Inspection Checklists	F-1


Executive Summary

For more than 30 years, most local jurisdictions have participated in the 
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) by adopting and enforcing 
floodplain management ordinances or regulations.  The NFIP was created 
as a partnership:  The federal government makes NFIP flood insurance 
and other federal assistance available to residents and businesses, and 
communities agree to regulate mapped flood hazard areas to reduce future 
flood damage.

With the publication of the International Building Code? (IBC?), the 
International Residential Code (IRC) the International Existing Building Code 
(IEBC), and the rest of the International Codes? (I-Codes), the opportunity 
exists for communities to integrate building safety and 
floodplain management.  This guide, Reducing Flood Losses Through the 
International Codes:  Meeting the Requirements of the National Flood 
Insurance Program, will help communities decide how best to accomplish 
that integration in order to initiate or continue participation in the NFIP.

The 2003 and 2006 editions of the I-Codes contain provisions that are 
consistent with the minimum flood-resistant design and construction 
requirements of the NFIP.  It is important to note, however, that adoption of 
one or more of the codes, by themselves, may not address all NFIP 
requirements.  Crosswalks of the NFIP regulations and the I-Codes, 
including Appendix G of the IBC, have been prepared and included in 
this guide.  This guide references the 2006 I-Codes (the crosswalks are 
annotated to show amendments approved in 2007).

The flood-resistant provisions in the I-Codes stem from cooperative 
efforts among the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the 
Structural Engineering Institute (SEI) of the American Society of Civil 
Engineers (ASCE), and other individuals and organizations.  These 
efforts began in 1991 with the development of flood load provisions.  
Those load provisions became part of ASCE 7 in 1995, were expanded in 
the 1998 edition of ASCE 7, and further amended in ASCE/SEI 7-02.  
This guide references ASCE/SEI 7-05.

Cooperative efforts continued with the development of ASCE 24-98, a 
standard for minimum requirements for flood-resistant design and 
construction of buildings and structures in flood hazard areas.  ASCE/SEI 
24-05 is referenced in this guide.   

Chapter 1 presents a brief overview of the NFIP, including the benefits 
of participation and the implications of choosing not to participate.  The 
NFIP is a voluntary program, but its benefits are far-reaching.  
Responsibilities of participating communities extend beyond issuance of 
building permits, and include administrative and map-related functions.  
Technical assistance and support are available from NFIP State 
Coordinating Agencies and FEMA regional offices.

Chapter 2 outlines some broad approaches to managing flood hazard 
areas.  Integrating a community’s approach with the I-Codes involves 
careful consideration and planning to reduce overlap of regulations, 
duplication of effort, and conflicts.  Advantages of using the building 
code to satisfy certain floodplain requirements are outlined.

Chapter 3 is a collection of topics on the implications of adopting the 
I-Codes for participation in the NFIP:
*	Section 3.1 reviews the NFIP definition of development because 
the NFIP requires that communities regulate all development in 
flood hazard areas, not just buildings and structures.
*	Section 3.2 summarizes how the utility-related I-Codes address 
provisions to protect building utility systems.
*	Section 3.3 briefly outlines the NFIP’s Community Rating System, 
which provides discounts on the cost of flood insurance within 
communities that adopt regulations that exceed the minimum 
requirements of the NFIP.
*	Section 3.4 includes brief explanations for consideration by 
communities that may elect to adopt certain standards that are 
higher than the minimum requirements of the NFIP.
*	Section 3.5 offers sample building code text amendments language 
to implement higher standards.
*	Section 3.6 describes the Coastal A Zone, an area where flood 
conditions include waves that are less than required for the NFIP to 
designate the area a V Zone, but that field research has identified 
as sufficient to cause building damage.
*	Section 3.7 summarizes the NFIP requirements pertaining to 
substantial improvements and repair of substantial damage, both 
concepts are particularly important when dealing with older 
buildings.
*	Section 3.8 summarizes how the codes address certain historic 
structures and describes two options:  issue permit or approve by 
variance.
*	Section 3.9 describes critical and essential facilities and notes that 
the IBC, ASCE 7, and ASCE 24 include provisions that apply to 
such facilities. 
*	Section 3.10 is a brief explanation of a part of the standard 
coverage provided by NFIP flood insurance.  Under specific 
circumstances, notably if a flood causes substantial damage, this 
coverage provides the owner with an additional payment towards 
the cost of bringing the building into compliance with the flood-
resistant provisions.

Chapter 4 outlines certain responsibilities that communities assume 
when they participate in the NFIP.  While many responsibilities are 
incorporated into the I-Codes, a number of others should be reviewed to 
make sure that they are assigned or captured in a companion floodplain 
management ordinance.

Chapter 5 addresses several important considerations related to state 
requirements.  States that adopt the I-Codes at the state level may have 
made amendments or may require that local amendments be approved by 
the state.  Some states have specific requirements for flood hazard area 
development and some issue floodplain permits.  Others exempt certain 
activities or types of buildings from the requirement to obtain a building 
permit, while some states may issue building permits for some activities.  
And, notably, if the code is adopted at the state level, then the matter of 
references to community flood hazard maps must be addressed.

Chapter 6 outlines a straightforward process, using worksheets, to help 
communities assess how their current approaches to regulating 
development in flood hazard areas and building permits compare with the 
NFIP requirements.  Also, a review process is outlined to facilitate 
decisions about appropriate modifications to processes and regulations.



Appendices include references and online resources (Appendix A), 
crosswalks of the NFIP requirements with the IBC (Appendix B) and the 
IRC (Appendix C), the flood resistant provisions of the IMC, IPC, IFGC, 
IPSDC and the IEBC (Appendix D), contact information for FEMA and 
state offices (Appendix E), and sample plan review and inspection 
checklists (Appendix F).

Acknowledgements

The original edition of this guide was prepared by the American Society 
of Civil Engineers (ASCE).  This third edition was prepared with 
financial support provided by the Mitigation Directorate of the U. S. 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS/FEMA).  The early 
contributions of the following reviewers are appreciated: 
Wayne Berggren, CFM, City of Mandeville, Louisiana, representing 
the Association of State Floodplain Managers, Inc.
Lois Forster, DHS/FEMA
John Ingargiola, DHS/FEMA
Trudie Johnson, CFM, City of Hilton Head, South Carolina, 
representing the Association of State Floodplain Managers, Inc.
Gregory A. Main, CFM, Indiana Department of Natural Resources
Christy L. Miller, CFM, Alaska Department of Commerce, Community 
& Economic Development
Kimberly Paarlberg, International Code Council, Inc.
Laura Pfister, Montana Floodplain Management Program
Rebecca C. Quinn, CFM, RCQuinn Consulting, Inc.
Michael Robinson, DHS/FEMA




1.	Introduction

1.1	Purpose of This Guide
This guide is intended to help community officials decide how to 
integrate the International Codes (I-Codes) into their current floodplain 
development and regulatory processes in order to meet the requirements 
to participate in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).  Careful 
attention is required to ensure that all requirements of the NFIP are 
addressed by communities through a combination of building codes and 
other ordinances or regulations.  Adoption of one or more of the I-Codes, 
by themselves, does not necessarily meet those requirements. 

This guide is not intended as an endorsement of any specific approach for 
achieving effective management of flood hazards, nor does it explain the NFIP 
requirements and how to administer them.  References and online 
resources are listed in Appendix A.

[Side bar:] 
This guide is based on the 2006 editions of the I-Codes.  Appendices B, C and D contain 
crosswalks of the NFIP regulations and the flood provisions of the I-Codes.  The I-Code texts 
are annotated to show code changes approved in the 2006/2007 cycle and published in the 
2007 Supplement.
[End side bar]


1.2	The I-Codes and the NFIP
This guide covers the family of codes known as the I-Codes that were 
developed under the auspices of the International Code Council (ICC).  
Each code in the series either meets or exceeds the minimum requirements 
of the NFIP with respect to the scope of each code:
*	The 2006 and 2003 International Building Code (IBC) meets the 
minimum design and construction requirements of the NFIP for all 
buildings and structures, including, by reference, one- and two-
family dwellings.  Appendix G addresses other NFIP requirements 
such as map-related duties, subdivisions, site work, manufactured 
homes, recreational vehicles, underground and above-ground 
storage tanks, and variances.
*	The 2006 and 2003 International Residential Code (IRC) meets 
the minimum requirements for flood-resistant design and 
construction of one- and two-family dwellings.  For construction in 
the floodway, the IRC refers to the IBC.
*	The 2006 and 2003 International Plumbing Code (IPC) meets 
the minimum requirements for flood-resistant design and 
construction of plumbing systems.
*	The 2006 and 2003 International Mechanical Code (IMC) meets 
the minimum requirements for flood-resistant design and 
construction of mechanical systems.
*	The 2006 and 2003 International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC) meets 
the minimum requirements for flood-resistant design and 
construction of fuel gas systems.
*	The 2006 and 2003 International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
(IPSDC) meets the minimum requirements for flood-resistant 
design and construction of private sewage disposal systems.
*	The 2006 and 2003 International Existing Building Code (IEBC? 
meets the minimum requirements for flood-resistant design and 
construction for existing buildings by reference to the requirements 
of the IBC.
*	The 2006 and 2003 International Code Council Performance 
Code (ICC PC) provides performance-based standards to 
provide resistance to flood loads and damage.

Table 1-1, starting on page 1-13, lists key provisions of the NFIP that 
pertain to buildings.  These provisions are cross-referenced to specific 
sections of the IBC and IRC, related standards, and NFIP resource 
documents.  Appendices B and C contain crosswalks of the complete text 
of the NFIP regulations and the pertinent sections from the 2006 IBC and 
2006 IRC, respectively (annotated with code changes approved in 2007).  
Appendix D summarizes the flood resistant provisions of the 2006 
editions of the IMC, IPC, IFGC, IPSDC and the IEBC.

Side bar: 
When the IBC is adopted, the IRC is adopted by reference.  If a state or community chooses not 
to regulate one- and two-family dwellings through the IRC, it must specifically exclude the IRC in 
its Ordinance for Adoption.  In this case, for the purpose of NFIP participation, the activities 
regulated by the IRC must be covered in a companion floodplain management ordinance or 
regulation.  

For the purposes of the NFIP and this guide, the term “community” means “any State or area or 
political subdivision thereof, or any Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or Alaska Native 
Village or authorized native organization, which has the authority to adopt and enforce floodplain 
management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.”  Counties, cities, towns, and 
parishes are communities.  In some states, flood control districts or planning districts may meet 
the definition if they exercise land-use authority.

End side bar.



1.3	Intended Audience
This guide is intended for officials of any unit of government who are 
responsible for regulating land development and building processes.  It is 
designed specifically to help those whose agencies are responsible for 
regulating floodplain development and those who administer building 
codes.  These responsibilities may be under the jurisdiction of a single 
office or distributed among several offices.  Regardless of how your 
community is organized, it is recommended that this guide be reviewed 
by every office that has a role in land development (including 
subdivisions) and construction regulation.  

1.4	Where to Get Help
Each state has an office that is designated as the State Coordinating 
Agency for the National Flood Insurance Program, commonly referred to 
as the ?NFIP State Coordinator.?  Contact information for the NFIP 
State Coordinators and a list of the Federal Emergency Management 
Agency’s (FEMA) 10 regional offices are included in Appendix E.
FEMA and others have produced numerous documents and publications 
related to the NFIP and regulation of flood hazard areas.  Reference and 
resource materials, including cited publications and online resources, are 
listed in Appendix A.

1.5	Purpose and Overview of the NFIP
NFIP Purpose.  The original authorizing legislation for the NFIP was 
passed in 1968.  Congress expressly found that a program of flood 
insurance can promote the public interest by encouraging sound land use 
by minimizing exposure of property to flood losses. . . ?  

The NFIP is intended to encourage states and local governments to recog-
nize and incorporate flood hazards in land use and development deci-
sions.  In some communities this is achieved by guiding development to 
areas with lower risk.  When decisions result in development within flood 
hazard areas, application of the criteria set forth in federal regulation (44 
CFR Section 60.3) is intended to minimize exposure and flood-related 
damage.

Overview of the NFIP.  The NFIP is administered by the DHS/FEMA 
and has three main elements:  
1.	Hazard identification and mapping, under which engineering 
studies are conducted and flood maps are prepared to delineate 
areas that are predicted to be subject to flooding under certain 
conditions;
2.	Floodplain management criteria for development, which establish 
the minimum requirements for communities to apply to development within 
mapped flood hazard areas with the intent of recognizing hazards in the 
entire land development process; and
3.	Flood insurance, which provides financial protection for property 
owners to cover flood-related damage to buildings and contents.  

Side bar:
If your community does not currently participate in the NFIP (see Section 1.8), you are strongly 
urged to join.  To do so, contact either your NFIP State Coordinator or your FEMA Regional 
Office listed in Appendix D.
End side bar.

Federal flood insurance is designed to provide an alternative to disaster 
assistance and disaster loans for home and business owners.  Disaster 
assistance rarely comes close to covering all of the costs to repair and 
clean up.  While available to qualified victims, disaster loans do not 
significantly ease the financial burden due to repayment terms.  It is 
important to remember that disaster assistance is available only after 
floods have been declared major disasters by the President of the United 
States.  Disaster loans are available after major disasters and when the 
U.S. Small Business Administration determines that an event has affected 
a certain number of uninsured homes and businesses.  In contrast, NFIP 
flood insurance claims will be paid any time damage is sustained from a 
qualifying flood event.

Another important objective of the NFIP is to break the cycle of flood 
damage.  Many buildings have been flooded, repaired or rebuilt, and 
flooded again.  Before the NFIP, in some parts of the country this cycle 
occurred every couple of years:  people rebuilt in the same flood-prone 
areas and used the same construction techniques that did not adequately 
resist flood damage.  

By encouraging communities to guide development to lower risk areas, 
and by requiring elevation of new buildings and nonconforming buildings 
that sustain major damage, one of the long-term objectives of the NFIP 
can be achieved:  reduce flood damage and losses.  Older buildings may 
be removed or replaced, or they may be upgraded or modified with 
techniques that lead to little or no flood damage.  Through the land 
development process, developers can often be required or encouraged to 
keep new development out of high-risk areas.

1.6	Overview of Community and State Responsibilities Under the NFIP
Overview of Community Responsibilities.  The NFIP regulations (44 CFR 
Section 59.22) outline actions to be taken by a community to become and 
remain eligible to participate in the NFIP.  A community agrees to take 
certain actions, including:
*	Adopting and enforcing floodplain management regulations that 
either meet or exceed the minimum standards of the NFIP.  
*	Applying the regulations to all designated special flood hazard 
areas (SFHAs) throughout its jurisdiction.
*	Submitting to FEMA the regulations (and subsequent amendments 
thereto), including copies of related zoning, building, and 
subdivision regulations; health codes; special purpose ordinances; 
and other corrective and preventive measures enacted to reduce or 
prevent flood-related damage.
*	Submitting to FEMA certain estimates relating to the community as 
a whole and to flood hazard areas, including population, number 
of residences, number of small businesses, and number of other 
types of structures.
*	Responding to FEMA?s periodic request for information on the 
community, including the number of permits and variances that 
may have been issued for development in the flood hazard area.
*	Identifying the location where flood hazard maps will be 
maintained and available for public inspection.
*	Appointing or designating an agency or individual official with the 
responsibility for the floodplain management program.
*	Maintaining a file with specific information on all development 
that occurs within the mapped flood hazard area, including 
documentation of certain building elevations and documentation of 
floodproofing designs, and making this information available for 
public inspection.  
*	Conducting periodic field inspections to ensure that ongoing 
development complies with issued permits and to check for 
unpermitted development.
*	Having objectives in the comprehensive plan that are consistent 
with floodplain management goals.
*	Notifying FEMA when revisions to the flood hazard maps are 
necessary and providing available data to support those revisions.
*	Cooperating with federal, state, local, and private entities that 
undertake projects to study, survey, identify, and map flood hazard 
areas.
*	Notifying FEMA, the state, and adjacent communities of any 
alteration or relocation of a watercourse.
*	Notifying FEMA when the community’s boundaries have been 
modified by such legal actions as annexation.

Overview of State Responsibilities.  The states have agreed to coordinate 
the NFIP with their communities and have designated an agency that is 
responsible for those functions (see Appendix E).  The NFIP State 
Coordinator’s office is specifically charged with being a link between 
FEMA and communities and can advise communities on how to comply 
with the NFIP requirements, as well as any applicable state laws and 
regulations.  The NFIP State Coordinator stays current on NFIP issues 
and can advise communities as to how specific provisions have been 
interpreted in many situations.  

The duties and responsibilities of the NFIP State Coordinator’s office are 
set forth in the NFIP regulations (44 CFR Section 60.25) and include:  
*	Enacting, if necessary, legislation that enables communities to 
regulate development in designated flood hazard areas.
*	Encouraging and assisting communities to qualify for participation 
in the NFIP.
*	Guiding and assisting communities in developing, implementing, 
and maintaining floodplain management regulations.
*	Providing communities and the general public with NFIP 
information.
*	Assisting communities in disseminating information about flood 
hazard areas and floodplain management requirements.
*	Assisting in the delineation of flood hazard areas when possible, 
and providing technical information to FEMA.
*	Recommending priorities for federal activities relative to 
community needs.
*	Notifying FEMA of problems with community regulations if such 
problems cannot be resolved between the state and the community.
*	Establishing minimum floodplain management standards for state 
activities. 
*	Coordinating floodplain management activities with other state, 
regional, and local planning and enforcement agencies.
*	Assisting in the identification and implementation of mitigation 
recommendations.
*	Participating in training opportunities and preparedness programs.

Other ways that some NFIP State Coordinators may support communities 
include:
*	Providing advice on improvements to local administrative 
procedures for issuing permits, handling variances, inspecting 
construction, and remedying violations.
*	Producing a floodplain management newsletter.
*	Reviewing proposed code and ordinance amendments to ensure 
NFIP compliance.
*	Explaining ways to use flood hazard maps, including how to seek 
revisions.
*	Assisting communities with applications to participate in the NFIP’s 
Community Rating System (CRS).
*	Conducting training workshops on all aspects of the NFIP and 
floodplain management.
*	Performing on-site technical assistance visits.  
*	Providing reports on community compliance to FEMA. 
*	Developing a program of certification for floodplain managers.

1.7	Benefits of Participating in the NFIP
While there is no federal requirement that communities participate in the 
NFIP, most communities choose to do so to make flood insurance avail-
able to their citizens.  In addition, federal assistance for acquisition or 
construction of buildings in flood hazard areas is not available in 
nonparticipating communities.  To participate, a community agrees to 
adopt, administer, and enforce provisions that either meet or exceed the 
minimum floodplain management requirements set forth in federal 
regulations.  

Side bar: 
General information about flood insurance is on the Internet at www.fema.gov
End side bar.

If your community does not presently participate in the NFIP, you are 
strongly urged to join.  To do so, contact either your NFIP State 
Coordinator or the FEMA Regional Office that supports your state.

There are four significant benefits of participating in the NFIP.  One 
focuses on property protection, while the remaining three focus on 
financial security.  Specifically:  
1.	Development that complies with the minimum NFIP performance 
criteria is less likely to experience major damage.  Studies have 
shown that, on average, buildings that meet the NFIP criteria 
sustain approximately 80 percent less damage than those that do 
not.
2.	Federally insured or regulated lenders must require that 
improvements located in mapped flood hazard areas be insured for 
flood damage.  If a community does not participate in the NFIP, 
then lenders must notify borrowers that federal disaster assistance 
for flood damage will not be available, including grants and loans.
3.	People who have flood insurance have a significant advantage over 
those who have no financial support or those who have to get loans 
to help repair and rebuild.  Most homeowners’ property insurance 
explicitly excludes damage from floods, and non-NFIP flood 
insurance is hard to find.  However, it is easy for most home and 
business owners to get NFIP flood insurance because many private 
companies write and sell policies on behalf of the NFIP.
4.	Federal disaster assistance is available to repair or restore public 
buildings in flood hazard areas if damaged by a disaster that is 
declared by the President of the United States.

In participating communities, NFIP flood insurance is available for both 
residential and nonresidential buildings, and additional coverage is 
available for contents.  Policies on buildings in flood hazard areas shown on 
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) include coverage that provides a claim 
payment to help defray certain costs when a flood-damaged 
building is required to be brought into compliance with community 
floodplain management requirements.  This additional coverage, called 
Increased Cost of Compliance, is described in Section 3.10.  The 
amount of this coverage is stated in the flood insurance policy documents.  

1.8	Implications of Not Participating in the NFIP
Communities that have been provided a FIRM by FEMA may elect not to 
participate in the NFIP (unless required to do so by state law).  If 
communities choose not to participate in the NFIP, the following apply:
*	NFIP flood insurance is not available. 
*	Federal agencies cannot provide grants and loans for construction, 
reconstruction, repair, rehabilitation, or additions to buildings in 
mapped SFHAs, including such agencies as the U.S. Department of 
Housing and Urban Development (HUD), the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. Small Business Administration 
(SBA), and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
*	Federal disaster assistance will not be provided in identified flood 
hazard areas for permanent restorative construction.  This means 
that public buildings damaged by flooding are not eligible for 
federal disaster assistance.
*	Individuals and families will receive only limited federal disaster 
housing assistance when a major disaster is declared.  Federal 
grants and assistance for repairs are not available.
*	Direct federal loans to residents and developers for properties in 
flood hazard areas are not available from government programs 
such as the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and the Federal 
Housing Administration (FHA). 
*	Other regulated mortgage lenders may make loans for properties in 
flood hazard areas, but they are required to notify borrowers that 
federal disaster assistance will not be provided in the event of a 
flood disaster.

Communities that initially declined to participate when the FIRM was 
prepared may subsequently decide to join the NFIP.  Insurance on 
buildings that were constructed in flood hazard areas after the date of the 
FIRM will be rated based on the risk of flooding.  If they were built 
below the base flood elevation (BFE) and are subject to damage, then 
flood insurance will be very expensive.  The FIRM in effect at the time a 
building was constructed, and the applicable actuarial rates based on that 
map, applies regardless of when the community elects to join the NFIP.
1.9	FEMA’s Involvement with Model Codes 
and Standards Producing Organizations
Many communities that participate in the NFIP do so through single-
purpose floodplain management ordinances.  For the most part, these 
ordinances are administered in land planning offices, usually in 
coordination with building permit offices.  In other cases, communities 
participate through various combinations of laws, ordinances, and 
regulations.  Despite efforts to coordinate, occasional conflicts have been 
known to arise between the NFIP requirements and a community’s 
building and other health and safety codes.

In the early 1990s, FEMA requested assistance from the National 
Institute of Building Sciences to examine 23 model building codes and 
standards, and to perform a detailed comparison between NFIP 
regulations, model building codes, consensus standards, and technical 
guidance documents.  The work was supported by the following model 
codes and standards organizations:
*	the Building Officials and Code Administrations International, Inc. 
(BOCA)*, 
*	the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. (SBCCI)*, 
*	the International Conference of Building Officials (ICBO)*, 
*	the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), and 
*	the National Conference of States on Building Codes and 
Standards (NCSBCS).

*	Effective February 1, 2003, BOCA, SBCCI and ICBO became one 
organization, the International Code Council, Inc. (ICC).

The result of this cooperative effort was the Code Compatibility Report, 
published in three volumes in October 1992.  The report outlined 
recommended changes to the codes and to various FEMA documents.  
As the three major code organizations made progress on the development 
of the I-Codes, FEMA executed an agreement with the Structural 
Engineering Institute of the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).  
ASCE was tasked with monitoring progress and proposing changes to the 
codes to improve consistency with the NFIP. 

In the early 1990s, FEMA and ASCE’s Structural Engineering Institute 
initiated work to develop flood loads for inclusion in ASCE 7 and ASCE 
24, a standard for flood-resistant design and construction (see 
Sections 1.10 and 1.11).  Although the NFIP had been in effect since 
1968, and by 1990 nearly 19,000 counties and towns were participating, 
there were no consensus standards for determining flood loads or for 
flood-resistant design and construction.

As the I-Codes were developed, FEMA, with support of ASCE, 
proposed code changes.  The 2000 editions were found to be nominally 
consistent with the NFIP minimum provisions.  In the subsequent code 
development cycles additional modifications continued to improve 
consistency.  

Side bar:
In 2008 the International Code Council is expected to publish ICC 600, Standard for Residential 
Construction in High Wind Regions.  It will include FEMA 550 as guidance for design of flood-
resistant foundations for residential buildings with wood or light-steel famed walls. 
End side bar.

1.10	ASCE 7:  Minimum Design Loads for 
Buildings and Other Structures
In 1991, ASCE, with FEMA assistance, organized a committee of nation-
ally recognized experts in the fields of structural engineering, construction 
techniques, and building codes and regulations.  The committee was tasked 
with developing flood load provisions to be included in ASCE 7.  Following 
the consensus standards process, including balloting, these provisions first 
appeared in ASCE 7-95.  Additional revisions were made to the flood load 
provisions in the 1998 edition of ASCE 7. 

The current edition, ASCE/SEI 7-05, is a referenced standard in the 2006 
IBC.

1.11	ASCE 24:  Flood-Resistant Design and Construction
In 1995, ASCE organized a standards development committee of 
nationally recognized individuals in the fields of floodplain management, 
structural engineering, construction techniques, and building codes and 
regulations.  Following the consensus standards process, including ballot-
ing, the committee’s work resulted in the first edition of ASCE 24 (1998), 
which provides minimum requirements for flood-resistant design and 
construction of buildings and structures located in flood hazard areas, 
including new structures and substantial repair or improvement of existing 
structures that are not designated as historic structures.  ASCE 24-98, is a 
referenced standard in the 2003 IBC and was used in the development of the 
flood-resistant design and construction provisions of the 2003 IRC.  

A revised edition, ASCE/SEI 24-05 was produced in 2005 and is 
referenced in the 2006 edition of the I-Codes.

1.12	Flood-Resistant Materials
The ICC Evaluation Service, Inc., a part of the International Code 
Council, performs technical evaluations of building products, 
components, methods, and materials.  Acceptance criteria, which form the 
basis of the evaluations, are developed by the ICC-ES technical staff in 
consultation with interested parties and the applicants who submit 
documentation for the technical evaluations.  The evaluation process 
results in the issuance of reports on code compliance, which are made 
available free of charge.  As of late 2007, the ICC-ES has not been asked 
to evaluate materials to determine conformance with the requirements for 
flood-resistant materials.  Details about the ICC-ES, acceptance criteria, 
the evaluation process, and the reports are available at www.icc-es.org. 

In 1999, the National Evaluation Service, Inc. (NES), with support from 
FEMA, convened an advisory committee to develop an evaluation plan 
for determining the flood resistance of materials entitled NES Evaluation 
Protocol for Determination of Flood-Resistance Properties of Building 
Elements.  This protocol provides guidance for testing to evaluate 
building elements for the ability to resist the effects of floodwater 
exposure.  It serves as a starting point for manufacturers to determine 
whether their building products are suitable for use below flood levels.  
Building materials that may be evaluated include interior and exterior 
wall, floor, ceiling, and roof materials and finishes; structural elements; 
insulating materials; and windows, doors, vents, and other types of fixed or 
operable openings.  The protocol addresses determining the physical and/or 
performance characteristics of the evaluation subject, exposure to simulated 
floodwater (fresh and saline), minimum drying times, and testing after 
exposure to establish changes in performance characteristics. 

1.13	Flood Elevations:  BFE and DFE
The BFE, as used by the NFIP, is the elevation of the floodwater surface 
relative to the datum specified on the FIRM that is expected to be 
reached by a flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or 
exceeded in any given year.  Although the term is misleading, this flood is 
commonly called the 100-year flood.

The I-Codes, ASCE 7, and ASCE 24 use the term design flood eleva-
tion (DFE).  The DFE is the elevation of the design flood, including 
wave height in coastal areas, relative to a specified datum.  The DFE must 
equal or exceed the BFE in all cases.  The design flood, from which the DFE 
is derived, is the flood associated with the greater of the following two 
areas:  
1.	The area flooded by 1-percent annual chance flood (base flood), 
or
2.	The area designated as the flood hazard area on a community’s 
flood hazard map.  

A community may designate flood hazard areas by electing to incorporate 
such factors as the impacts of future development conditions on runoff, 
or a surcharge on flood stages resulting from designation of a floodway 
that is more restrictive than that designated by FEMA.  Communities also 
may choose to base the DFE on a lower frequency flood (greater 
magnitude) or on an historical flood that was higher than the base flood 
used by FEMA.

Many states require freeboard and many communities choose to adopt 
freeboard where it is not required (see Section 3.5).  Freeboard is an 
added factor of safety expressed in feet above a specific flood elevation.  
It tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to 
flood heights greater than those computed for ideal 
situations.  Freeboard may be incorporated in the DFE (e.g., by defining 
the DFE as the BFE plus freeboard), or it may be specified to be added to 
the DFE.  

Side bar:
Seek advice from the NFIP State Coordinator or the FEMA Regional Office if your FIRMs show 
A99 or AR zones.  A99 zones designate areas to be protected from base flood by levees or 
Federal Flood Protection Systems that are under construction.  AR zones are where previously 
accredited flood protection systems have been decertified but are in the process of being 
restored to provide base flood or greater levels of protection.  
End side bar.

There are circumstances where FIRMs do not specify BFEs:
*	Zone A is used for flood hazard areas where engineering analyses 
have not been performed to develop detailed flood elevations.  In 
these areas, other sources for flood information should be 
consulted, including the state, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 
and the Natural Resources Conservation Service.  FEMA has 
prepared a guidance document that outlines simplified methods to 
approximate  
the BFE, Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone 
A Areas:  A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) 
Flood Elevations (FEMA 265).
*	AO and AH zones where shallow overland or sheetflow is expected.  
The flood elevation is designated as a depth number on the map, or 
if not designated, the flood elevation is to be at least 2 feet (610 
mm) above the highest grade adjacent to the proposed building 
footprint.



Table 1-1.	Summary of Selected Key NFIP Provisions,  
Code Citations, and Reference Documents  
(See Appendices B and C for comprehensive crosswalks of the NFIP regulations 
to the IBC and IRC, respectively; 
Appendix D contains the flood resistant provisions of the IMC, IPC, IFGC, 
IPSDC and the IEBC.)

Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(a)(3)(i)  new 
construction and 
substantial 
improvements to be 
designed and 
adequately anchored 
to prevent flotation, 
collapse, or lateral 
movement

2006 IBC
1605.2.2 and 
1605.3.1.2  flood 
loads and load 
combinations 
(reference ASCE 7)
1612.4  design and 
construction 
(reference ASCE 24)
[Reference Appendix 
D for IEBC; see IBC 
Chapter 34 for 
existing buildings]

2006 IRC
R301.1  construction 
to support all loads, 
including flood 
loads
R324.1.1  structural 
systems designed, 
connected, and 
anchored

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Section 1.5.5  
anchorage and 
connections to resist 
effects of vertical and 
lateral loads
Section 1.6 flood 
loads and 
combination of loads

Other Publications
ASCE/SEI 7-02 or 
ASCE/SEI  7-05, 
Minimum Design Loads 
for Buildings and Other 
Structures 
FEMA 550, 
Recommended 
Residential Construction 
for the Gulf Coast:  
Building on Strong and 
Safe Foundation


Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(a)(3)(ii)  new 
construction and 
substantial 
improvements to be 
constructed with 
materials resistant to 
flood damage

2006 IBC
801.1.3  interior 
finishes, trim, and 
decorative materials 
to be in accordance 
with FEMA FIA-TB#2
1403.6  exterior walls 
to be resistant to water 
damage

2006 IRC
R324.1.7 and R501.3  
building materials to 
be flood-resistant, 
installation methods 
for flooring and 
walls to conform to 
FEMA FIA-TB#2

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Chapter 5  exposed 
structural and 
nonstructural 
materials, including 
connections, to be 
resistant to damage, 
deterioration, 
corrosion or decay 
due to direct and 
prolonged contact 
with floodwater

Other Publications
National Evaluation 
Service, Inc., Evaluation 
Plan for Determination of 
Flood-Resistance of 
Building Elements
Technical Bulletin 
FEMA FIA-TB#2:  Flood-
Resistant Material 
Requirements for 
Buildings Located In 
Special Flood Hazard 
Areas
Technical Bulletin 
FEMA FIA-TB#8:  
Corrosion Protection for 
Metal Connectors in 
Coastal Areas for 
Structures Located in 
Special Flood Hazard 
Areas


Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(a)(3)(iv)  
electrical, heating, 
ventilation, 
plumbing, and air-
conditioning 
equipment and other 
service facilities to be 
designed and/or 
located to protect 
components

2006 IBC
1403.7 components 
not to be mounted on 
or through breakaway 
walls
1612.4  design and 
construction of 
buildings and 
structures (including 
utility support 
systems) to be in 
accordance with 
ASCE 24
[See also Appendix D 
for IMC, IPC, IFGC, 
and IPSDC]

2006 IRC
R324.1.5  new and 
replacement 
mechanical and 
electrical systems to 
be elevated
IFGC R301.5  
appliance 
installations to be 
elevated or 
otherwise protected
R1601.3.8  ducts and 
duct systems to be 
elevated

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Chapter 7  utilities 
and attendant 
equipment to be 
elevated or designed, 
constructed and 
installed to prevent 
floodwaters from 
entering or 
accumulating within 
the components; 
utilities not to be 
mounted on 
breakaway walls

Other Publications
FEMA 348, Protecting 
Building Utilities From 
Flood Damage:  
Principles and Practices 
for the Design and 
Construction of Flood 
Resistant Building Utility 
Systems
Technical Bulletin 
FEMA FIA-TB#4:  
Elevator Installation for 
Buildings Located in 
Special Flood Hazard 
Areas


Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(a)(6)(i)  
new/replacement  
sanitary sewage 
system designed to 
minimize/eliminate 
infiltration/discharges
(ii) on-site waste 
disposal systems 
located to avoid 
impairment or 
contamination

2006 IBC
Appendix G 401.3  
Sewer facilities

2006 IRC
R324.1.6  general 
performance, refer to 
Chapter 3 of the 
International Private 
Sewage Disposal 
Code

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Section 7.3  buried 
and exposed 
plumbing systems, 
systems below flood 
level, and sanitary 
systems, including 
septic tanks

Other Publications
FEMA 348, Protecting 
Building Utilities From 
Flood Damage:  
Principles and Practices 
for the Design and 
Construction of Flood 
Resistant Building Utility 
Systems

Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(b)(1)  require 
permits for all 
development, 
including placement 
of manufactured 
homes

2006 IBC
Appendix G 101.3  
Scope (and definition 
of Development)

2006 IRC
R101.2  Scope
R105.3.1.1  
specifically 
addresses 
substantial 
improvement and 
substantial damage 
of existing buildings
Appendix E  
Manufactured 
Housing Used as 
Dwellings AE101, 
Exception, refers to 
IRC R324
Appendix J  Existing 
Buildings AJ102.5 
work in existing 
buildings in flood 
hazard areas per 
R105.3.1.1 

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Section 1.1  defines 
the scope to be new 
structures, including 
subsequent work and 
substantial repair or 
substantial 
improvement

Other Publications
ASFPM and Federal 
Interagency 
Floodplain 
Management Task 
Force, Addressing Your 
Community’s Flood 
Problems:  A Guide for 
Elected Officials
FEMA 480, NFIP 
Floodplain Management 
Requirements:  A Study 
Guide and Desk 
Reference for Local 
Officials 

Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(b)(5)  where 
flood elevation data 
are provided:
(i)  obtain lowest 
floor elevation of 
new and 
substantially 
improved structures
(ii)  for floodproofed 
nonresidential 
structures, obtain 
elevation to which 
structure was 
floodproofed
(iii)  maintain records 
of elevations 

2006 IBC
109.3.3  inspection 
and submission of 
Elevation Certificate
1612.5.1  submission 
of specific 
certifications, 
including Elevation 
Certificate
104.7 and Appendix 
G 103.8  retention of 
department records

2006 IRC
R109.1.3  
inspections and 
submission of 
Elevation Certificate
R104.7  retention of 
department records

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Does not address 
administrative 
requirements or 
submission of 
certifications

Other Publications
Elevation Certificate 
(FEMA Form 81-31).  
[Online].  Available:  
www.fema.gov/busine
ss/nfip/elvinst.shtm
Floodproofing Certificate 
(FEMA Form 81-65) 
[Online].  Available:   
www.fema.gov/plan/pr
event/fhm/dl_fpc.shtm
FEMA 467-1, Floodplain 
Management Bulletin:  
Elevation Certificate

Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(b)(8)  require 
installation of MFH 
using methods to 
minimize flood 
damage, including 
anchoring, and to 
resist wind forces

2006 IBC
Appendix G 501.1  
elevation 
requirements
Appendix G 501.2  
foundation 
requirements
Appendix G 501.3  
anchoring 
requirements

2006 IRC
R324.1.8  MFH 
elevation per R324.2; 
anchor and tie-down 
per AE604 and 
AE605.  MFH in 
floodways per IBC
Appendix AE101  
refers to IRC R324

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Does not specifically 
address 
manufactured 
housing separate 
from other buildings.  
Foundations for MFH 
to be designed as 
other foundations 
and based on 
location within flood 
hazard areas (with 
and without high 
velocity wave action) 

Other Publications
FEMA 85, Manufactured 
Home Installation in 
Flood Hazard Areas
[Note:  HUD, NFPA and 
ICC are developing 
MFH standards, 
including installation 
provisions.]

Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(c)(2)  require all 
new and 
substantially 
improved structures 
to have the lowest 
floor elevated to or 
above the flood 
elevation

2006 IBC
1603.1.6  Flood load 
(information in 
application)
1612.4  design and 
construction 
(reference ASCE 24)
3402.1  Exception 
requires substantial 
improvement or repair 
of existing buildings 
to be brought into 
compliance with flood 
provisions

2006 IRC
R105.3.1.1  
specifically 
addresses 
substantial 
improvement and 
substantial damage 
of existing buildings
R324.2.1  elevation 
requirements, except 
for conforming 
enclosures
R324.1.4  lowest 
floor, excluding 
enclosures that meet 
certain use 
limitations and are 
compliant

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Section 2.3  specifies 
general elevation 
requirements
Section 4.4 specifies 
elevation 
requirements in 
Coastal High Hazard 
Areas (V Zones) and 
Coastal A Zones

Other Publications
FEMA 259, Engineering 
Principles and Practices 
for Retrofitting Flood 
Prone Residential 
Buildings
FEMA 550, 
Recommended 
Residential Construction 
for the Gulf Coast:  
Building on Strong and 
Safe Foundation

Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(c)(3)  for 
nonresidential 
structures:
(i)  lowest floor 
elevated, or
(ii)  floodproofed 
(including utility and 
sanitary facilities)

2006 IBC
1612.4  design and 
construction 
(reference ASCE 24)

2006 IRC
Not applicable to 
one- and two-family 
dwellings

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Section 2.3  specifies 
general elevation 
requirements
Chapter 6  details 
restrictions and 
requirements for dry 
and wet 
floodproofing

Other Publications
Technical Bulletin 
FEMA FIA-TB#3:  Non-
Residential 
Floodproofing  
Requirements and 
Certification for Buildings 
Located in Special Flood 
Hazard Areas
FEMA 348, Protecting 
Building Utilities From 
Flood Damage:  
Principles and Practices 
for the Design and 
Construction of Flood 
Resistant Building Utility 
Systems

Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(c)(4)  for 
floodproofed 
nonresidential 
structures:
(i)  registered design 
professional to 
develop and/or 
review the structural 
design and certify
(ii)  certification 
retained in records

2006 IBC
104.7  retention of 
department records
1612.5.1  submission 
of specific 
certifications, 
including Elevation 
Certificate

2006 IRC
Not applicable to 
one- and two-family 
dwellings

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Chapter 6 details 
restrictions and 
requirements for dry 
and wet 
floodproofing, but 
does not include 
administrative 
requirements

Other Publications
Floodproofing Certificate 
(FEMA Form 81-65) 
[Online].  Available:  
www.fema.gov/plan/pr
event/fhm/dl_fpc.shtm


Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(c)(5)  fully 
enclosed areas 
below elevated 
buildings are to be:  
limited in use 
(parking, access, 
storage); provided 
with flood openings 
that meet minimum 
criteria or are 
designed and 
certified by a 
registered design 
professional

2006 IBC
1202.3  under-floor 
ventilation (exception 
allows flood 
openings)
1612.4  design and 
construction 
(reference ASCE 24)
1612.5.1  Flood 
hazard certificates (for 
flood opening 
designs other than as 
specified)

2006 IRC
R324.2.2  enclosed 
area below design 
flood elevation, use 
limitations and flood 
opening 
specifications
R408.5  Enclosing 
underfloor spaces to 
have flood openings 
Garages allowed if 
elevated or 
compliant with 
provisions for 
enclosures below 
elevated buildings

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Section 2.6  details 
provisions for 
enclosures below 
DFE, including 
engineered and 
nonengineered 
openings (in A and 
AE Zones)

Other Publications
Technical Bulletin 
FEMA FIA-TB#1:  
Openings in Foundation 
Walls for Buildings 
Located in Special Flood 
Hazard Areas

Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(d)(3)  prohibit 
floodway encroach-
ment unless no 
impact on flood 
levels is 
demonstrated

2006 IBC
Appendix G 103.5 
and G 401.1  floodway 
development not 
authorized unless no 
increase in flood level 
is demonstrated

2006 IRC
R301.2.4  residential 
development in 
floodways to be 
reviewed under the 
IBC
R324.1.8  
manufactured 
housing in 
floodways to comply 
with the IBC

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Section 2.2  flood 
elevations and 
conveyance to be 
maintained

Other Publications
FEMA  480, NFIP 
Floodplain Management 
Requirements:  A Study 
Guide and Desk 
Reference for Local 
Officials 
FEMA FIA-12, Appeals, 
Revisions, and 
Amendments to NFIP 
Maps:  A Guide for 
Community Officials


Additional requirements for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas 
subject to high velocity 
wave action (V Zones)

Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(e)(4)  require all 
new and 
substantially 
improved 
construction to be 
elevated on pilings 
and columns so that:
(i)  bottom of lowest 
horizontal structural 
member of the lowest 
floor is at or above 
the flood elevation,
(ii)  pile or column 
foundation and 
structure are 
anchored to resist 
flotation, collapse 
and lateral movement 
due to wind and 
water loads; 
registered design 
professional to 
develop or review 
the design, 
specifications and 
plans and provide 
certification

2006 IBC
1603.1.6  specifies 
elevation of the 
bottom of the lowest 
horizontal structural 
member
1605.2.2 and 
1605.3.1.2  flood 
loads and combined 
loads
1612.4  design and 
construction 
(reference ASCE 24)
1612.5.2  submission 
of certifications

2006 IRC
R324.3.1  elevation 
requirements
R324.3.2  foundation 
requirements, 
including wind and 
water loads
R324.3.5  registered 
professional to certify 
design and methods 
of construction

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Section 2.3 and 
Section 4.4  specify 
elevation 
requirements
Section 1.5, Sections 
2.4 and 2.5, and 
Chapter 4 address 
foundations and 
designs

Other Publications
FEMA 55, Coastal 
Construction Manual 
Technical Bulletin 
FEMA FIA-TB #8:  
Corrosion Protection 
for Metal Connectors 
in Coastal Areas for 
Structures Located in 
Flood Hazard Areas
FEMA 550, 
Recommended 
Residential 
Construction for the 
Gulf Coast:  Building 
on Strong and Safe 
Foundation

Key Provisions of the NFIP
60.3(e)(5)  enclosed 
areas, if any, are to 
be constructed with  
non-supporting, 
breakaway walls, 
lattice, or screening 
intended to collapse 
under wind and 
water loads; uses 
limited to parking, 
building access, or 
storage

2006 IBC
1612.4  requires 
design and construct 
in accordance with 
ASCE 24
1612.5.2  submission 
of certification of 
breakaway wall 
design under certain 
circumstances

2006 IRC
R324.3.3  
specifications for 
walls and partitions of 
enclosures below 
elevated buildings, 
specifically for 
breakaway walls

ASCE/SEI 24-05
Section 4.6  outlines 
provisions for enclo-
sures below DFE with 
breakaway walls, and 
references ASCE 7 for 
design criteria

Other Publications
FEMA 55, Coastal 
Construction Manual
Technical Bulletin 
FEMA FIA-TB #5:  
Free of Obstruction 
Requirements for 
Buildings Located in 
Coastal High Hazard 
Areas
Technical Bulletin 
FEMA FIA-TB #9:  
Design and 
Construction 
Guidance for 
Breakaway Walls 
Below Elevated 
Coastal Buildings

End of Table 1.1

2.	Approaches to Floodplain Management

States and communities throughout the United States take a number of 
approaches to floodplain management.  While this guide does not cover 
every variation, it highlights three common approaches to illustrate the 
types of issues you may face in your community as you integrate 
floodplain management and building codes.  The three approaches 
described below are:  
*	The comprehensive approach, 
*	The stand-alone floodplain management regulation approach, and 
*	The building code approach, relying on the International Codes? 
(I-Codes).  

Section 2.4 outlines several advantages to using the I-Codes to participate 
in the NFIP.  It is important for you to fully understand those advantages 
before you begin to evaluate your community’s approach.  A suggested 
framework for evaluation is covered in Chapter 6. 

2.1	The Comprehensive Approach
Under the broad concept of floodplain management many communities 
coordinate several separate regulatory functions in separate agencies to 
achieve multiple land use, environmental, and public safety goals.  These 
goals often include avoiding flood hazard areas when buildable land is 
available outside of mapped flood hazard areas and otherwise minimizing 
flood hazard area development.  Minimization techniques include such 
measures as low-density zoning, waterway buffers or setbacks, transfer of 
development rights, evacuation access requirements, and others.  While 
specific programs or functional organizations may vary considerably from 
community to community, the ?comprehensive approach? to floodplain 
management is generally considered to include:
*	A plan, whether it is called a comprehensive plan, general plan, 
land use plan, master plan, or is a combination of several plans.  
This plan is a collection of policies and guidance on how the 
community is expected to grow, change, and look in the future.  
With respect to flood hazard areas, this plan may recognize existing 
and future risks and establish a goal of reducing future exposure 
through various mechanisms.
*	A zoning ordinance, which is a tool to help achieve the goals set 
forth in the plan.  Zoning typically divides a community into 
districts and establishes use and development criteria within each 
district type.  Typical zoning districts are residential, commercial, 
industrial, and agriculture, and various permutations and 
combinations of these uses.  Development criteria typically specify 
such parameters as density, size, bulk, height, setbacks, and 
appearance.  Some communities address floodplains as a separate 
conservation zone with its own specifications, or as an ?overlay? to 
the other zones, in which case the zoning specifications are 
modified to achieve flood-related goals.
*	A subdivision ordinance, which is another tool to achieve the 
planning goals.  These regulations typically address lot size, shape, 
and setbacks; curbs, sidewalks, and gutters; open space; and public 
improvements such as street layout and dimensions, drainage and 
storm water management, and installation of utilities.  Many 
subdivision ordinances are designed to avoid mapped flood hazard 
areas through the use of open space conservation and setbacks 
from bodies of water.  Where floodplain impacts are unavoidable, 
ordinances may guide development to less hazard-prone areas 
through lot layouts to put building pads on higher ground, or by 
requiring consideration of non-fill methods of elevating buildings.
*	Building codes and other health and safety codes, which are 
applied after zoning, land use, and subdivision decisions, regarding 
what and where to build, have been made.  The primary purpose of 
building codes and other health and safety codes is to provide 
minimum requirements to safeguard the public safety, health, and 
general welfare.

For a complete discussion of the comprehensive approach to floodplain 
management, and for an examination of a variety of tools to achieve flood 
damage reduction goals through the subdivision process, refer to 
Subdivision Design in Flood Hazard Areas, Planning Advisory Service 
Report Number 473, published by the American Planning Association.

Side bar:
The comprehensive approach yields another potential benefit.  Avoiding and minimizing flood 
hazards may result in credits under the NFIP’s Community Rating System, described in Section 
3.3.
End of side bar

2.2	Stand-Alone Floodplain Management Regulations Approach
Many communities that participate in the NFIP have adopted a separate 
ordinance to address most, if not all, of the minimum requirements of the 
NFIP.  Typically administered by a planning office, this single-purpose, 
stand-alone ordinance also incorporates other state and community 
floodplain management requirements, including administrative 
procedures, land management criteria, and building-specific provisions.  
The extent to which the stand-alone ordinance is coordinated with the 
building code and other health and safety codes, whether on paper or 
through coordinated review procedures, varies significantly from state to 
state and community to community.  

Some states and communities do not regulate development in general, but 
have a single special use permit that is required only in mapped flood 
hazard areas.  Typically, this approach is taken solely to meet the 
minimum floodplain management requirements of the NFIP.  

2.3	Building Code Approach
Prior to the availability of the 2000 I-Codes, the model building codes 
included flood-related provisions to varying degrees, but none were fully 
consistent with the requirements of the NFIP (FEMA, Code Compatibility 
Report).  Therefore, to participate in the NFIP most communities adopted 
stand-alone floodplain management regulations or ordinances that typical-
ly included administrative, land use, and building sciences provisions.

Side bar:
When the IBC is adopted, the IRC is adopted by reference.  If you specifically exclude the IRC, 
then you must recapture one- and two-family dwellings in another ordinance in order to 
participate in the NFIP.  Similarly, you will include in that ordinance the provisions of IBC 
Appendix G if you do not adopt it.
End side bar.

With the 2003 and 2006 editions of the I-Codes, it is possible to integrate 
building codes and floodplain management into a single administrative 
process.  In order to participate in the NFIP using this approach, all of the 
I-Codes must be adopted, including International Building Code (IBC) Appendix 
G.  Because Appendix G covers some development activities other than 
buildings and structures, it may be most appropriately administered by a 
planning or zoning office.  A separate ordinance is still required in order 
to capture development that is not covered by the scopes of the I-Codes 
(filling and grading not associated with buildings and structures, paving, 
roads, bridges, culverts, dams, ponds, levees, floodwalls, and some utility 
infrastructure).  

The inclusion of flood-resistant provisions in the I-Codes may bring new 
functions to many building departments, specifically with regard to the 
activities addressed in IBC Appendix G.  However, it may help 
streamline the development process for some communities.  

2.4	Advantages of Reducing Flood Losses 
Through the I-Codes
Continued close coordination between departments is vital to achieve a 
comprehensive approach to floodplain management.  Adopting the 
I-Codes may result in shifting some provisions and responsibilities to the 
building department.  As part of the discussion and decision process 
outlined in Chapter 6, you will need to address some of the implications 
of participating in the NFIP through the I-Codes, including:
*	All Hazard-Related Building Construction Requirements are in One 
Place.  In the past, the model building codes have included, to 
some extent, provisions related to natural hazards such as seismic 
hazards, high winds, severe winter storms, and flood hazards.  The 
I-Codes address all of these hazards on a consistent and rational 
basis, which allows mitigation of the effects of the natural hazards 
that are found within each jurisdiction’s boundaries.  
*	Minimize Code Conflicts.  The likelihood of conflicting code 
provisions or interpretation increases when a community has two 
or more regulations that apply to a single project.  When different 
departments, agencies, or offices administer the building code and 
other health and safety codes, along with the floodplain 
management ordinance, conflicts or misinterpretation among 
various code and ordinance provisions can result.  This is 
especially true when one office administers the floodplain 
management provisions and another office administers the building 
code.  Another way that code conflicts arise is when amendments 
are made to one code or ordinance and others are not amended at 
the same time to maintain consistency.
*	Strengthened Enforcement.  Building departments routinely inspect 
construction, and they have clear authority and responsibility to 
require compliance and to enforce building permit conditions.  
Stand-alone floodplain management ordinances also include 
administrative provisions, including enforcement.  Often, these 
enforcement provisions do not parallel the building department’s 
enforcement procedures, especially if a model floodplain 
management ordinance was adopted without tailoring to local 
circumstances.  Having separate and perhaps differing provisions 
for inspection and enforcement may lead to problems, such as if a 
permittee claims inconsistent treatment by different departments, 
agencies, or offices.
*	Effective, Routine Inspections.  Building departments typically 
conduct multiple inspections at specific times during the 
construction process, and builders are accustomed to standard 
notification procedures.  In communities where the flood-resistant 
design and construction provisions are enforced by a department 
other than the building department, inspections to check those 
specific provisions may not be conducted with the same regularity 
or may not be coordinated with the building inspections.

*	Consistent Permit Conditions and Requirements.  Other problems 
arise if the building permit, construction plans and specifications, 
and inspection forms do not explicitly state the elements required 
for compliance with flood-resistant design and construction 
requirements.  Inspectors may lack the proper information to 
perform their required duties effectively.  For example, it would be 
difficult to verify that a building footprint is located outside of the 
floodway if the floodway boundary is not shown on the site plan 
submitted as part of the application for a building permit.  
Similarly, if the flood openings specifications for an enclosed area 
beneath an elevated building are described in writing as a condition 
of the floodplain permit but are not shown on the construction 
drawings, they may be overlooked by both the contractor and the 
building inspector.
*	Improved Treatment of Existing Buildings.  One of the NFIP 
requirements that community officials sometimes find challenging 
to enforce effectively applies to existing buildings that are located 
in flood hazard areas that are proposed for improvements or 
restoration and repair after substantial damage.  Building 
departments routinely handle permits for existing buildings, yet 
planning and zoning departments, which are often responsible for 
administering floodplain management ordinances, rarely deal with 
proposals to physically modify structures that are on sites that are 
already developed.  This has been known to lead to gaps in 
enforcement of the substantial improvement and substantial 
damage requirements of the NFIP. 

Side bar:
Section 3.7 provides additional background on substantial improvement and repair of 
substantially damaged buildings in flood hazard areas.
End side bar.

3.	Implications of Adopting the I-Codes

As your community considers whether to use the International Codes 
(I-Codes) as the primary means to regulate floodplain development and to 
participate in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), you can use 
this section as a resource.  It covers some of the floodplain management 
implications that will need to be addressed as you make your decisions.  
Worksheet B in Chapter 6 will help you assess your current floodplain 
management practices and procedures, the starting point for determining 
how the adoption of the I-Codes will impact those practices and what 
changes will be necessary as a result. 

Topics covered in this section include:  floodplain development other than 
buildings; the utility-related I-Codes; the NFIP?s Community Rating 
System (CRS); choosing higher standards for flood hazard area develop-
ment (including sample code revision texts); regulating substantial 
damage and substantial improvement; historic structures, and the NFIP?s 
Increased Cost of Compliance insurance coverage.  Chapter 4 addresses 
community responsibilities, including record keeping, permitting 
requirements, modifications to the I-Codes, flood hazard map duties, 
elevation certificates, inspections, and variances.

3.1	Development Other Than Buildings
The NFIP requires that minimum development standards be applied to all 
development, including buildings and structures that are built or 
substantially improved in the flood hazard area.  The NFIP definition of 
Development is very broad:  it includes temporary structures and 
development activities other than buildings.  The same definition is 
included in the International Building Code (IBC), Appendix G.  These 
other development activities are regulated to prevent floodway 
encroachments and obstructions that may increase flood heights.

Side bar:
The NFIP and IBC Appendix G define “Development” to mean “any man-made change to 
improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, 
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of 
equipment or materials.”  [NFIP §59.1]
End side bar.

Because the NFIP requires communities to regulate all development in 
flood hazard areas, a code that applies only to buildings does not fulfill 
the requirements for participation.  The building code, or a combination of 
the code and another ordinance, must address all development.  It is also 
important to note that adopting the IBC alone will not meet NFIP requirements 
because it does not contain the floodplain management criteria that apply to 
development other than buildings.  

IBC Appendix G addresses these development activities:  subdivision of 
land; site development and utilities; placement of manufactured home 
units and recreational vehicles; above-ground and underground tanks; and 
other building work that is not within the scope of the IBC (detached 
accessory structures; fences in floodways that may block the passage of 
floodwaters; oil derricks; retaining walls; sidewalks and driveways; and 
prefabricated swimming pools).

Certain other development activities that are not normally addressed by 
building officials are included in the scope of IBC Appendix G.  
Specifically, development includes other structures that may impact 
waterways and floodways, such as fills, transportation infrastructure 
(roads, bridges, and culverts), and water resources facilities (flood walls 
and levees, channel modifications, dams, and ponds).  For the most part, 
these activities may be permitted if outside of a mapped floodway, 
although analyses are to be prepared if a floodway has not been 
determined.  

3.2	The Utility-Related I-Codes
With respect to minimizing flood damage, the overall objectives for on-
site utility systems for buildings constructed in flood hazard areas are to 
minimize damage and to facilitate clean up and repairs so that people can 
return to their homes and businesses in a timely manner after a flood.  The 
most effective way to achieve this objective is to elevate utilities to or 
above the design flood elevation (DFE).  This requirement is specifically 
addressed in the IBC, the International Residential Code? (IRC?), and the 
specific utility codes, including the International Mechanical Code (IMC), 
the International Plumbing Code (IPC), the International Private Sewage 
Disposal Code (IPSDC), and the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC).  

Side bar:
Section 1.13 explains the base flood elevation (BFE) used by the NFIP and the design flood 
elevation (DFE) used by the I-Codes and ASCE 24.
End of side bar.

Post-flood field investigations conducted by the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) reinforce the critical importance of 
elevating or otherwise protecting building utility systems from floodwater 
that may enter or accumulate within the system components.  Exterior 
mechanical units, such as heat pumps and air-conditioning units, are easily 
elevated to or above the DFE on roofs, platforms, or fill pads.  In these 
cases, care should be directed to more than just the height of the platform.  

Utility platforms are subject to the same flood loads as building 
foundations, and should be designed and constructed to resist those 
loads.  Platforms may be independent from the base building structure or 
attached to or cantilevered from the structure.  If higher than 3 to 4 feet 
(914 to 1219 mm) off the ground, access stairs may be required by the 
applicable code, and the platform should be sized to allow access for 
repair and maintenance of the supported equipment.

Where elevating building utility equipment or systems above the DFE is 
not feasible, the NFIP regulations provide a performance-based option:
If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new 
construction and substantial improvements shall . . .  (iii) be 
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages, 
and (iv) be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, 
and air conditioning equipment designed and/or located so as to 
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components 
during conditions of flooding.  [Section 60.3(a)(3)]

To date, FEMA and most states and communities have relied on manu-
Facturers’ specifications, warranties, and written statements that specify 
which types of equipment meet this performance-based provision.  For the 
community, this suggests that applicants may be required to submit a written 
statement from the manufacturer before a permit to use utility service 
equipment below the DFE is approved.  States and communities have reported 
that manufacturers almost always refuse to provide such a statement or 
warranty because most equipment is not designed to be flood resistant.  
Indeed, experience indicates that most mechanical and electrical equipment 
suffers major damage when exposed to floodwater.

Side bar:
FEMA has prepared a guidance document on utilities:  Protecting Building Utilities From Flood 
Damage:  Principles and Practices for the Design and Construction of Flood Resistant Building 
Utility Systems (FEMA 348).
End of side bar.

Each of the I-Codes addresses protection of building utility systems from 
flood damage in the following manner:
*	2006 and 2003 IBC.  Section 1612.1 sets forth the general 
requirement that ?all new construction of buildings, structures and 
portions of buildings and structures, including substantial 
improvements and restoration of substantial damage to buildings 
and structures, shall be designed and constructed to resist the 
effects of flood hazards and flood loads.?  Although this text does 
not specifically reference utility service equipment, the NFIP 
requires that it apply to all elements of a building, including 
building utility systems.  Subsequent chapters of the IBC refer to 
the individual I-Codes for specific utilities.
*	2006 and 2003 IRC.  Section R324 covers general flood-resistant 
construction provisions, including establishment of the DFE and 
protection of mechanical, plumbing, , electrical systems, and ducts 
by elevation to or above the DFE.  Section R324.1.6 includes 
requirements for the protection of water supply and sanitary 
sewage systems located in flood hazard areas, requiring both to be 
designed to minimize infiltration into the systems.  In addition, 
sewage systems are to be located or designed to minimize 
discharges of sewage into floodwater.  
*	2006 and 2003 IPC.  Section 309 specifically addresses flood-
resistant requirements.  Systems and equipment in structures in 
flood hazard areas are to be capable of resisting hydrostatic and 
hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of 
buoyancy.  Certain system elements must be sealed or elevated, 
including water supply pumps, potable water well seals, and 
manhole covers.
*	2006 and 2003 IMC.  Section 301.13 includes the general 
requirement that mechanical systems are to be placed above the 
BFE or protected to prevent water from entering or accumulating 
within appliance ducts or plenum spaces.  Sections 602.4 and 
603.7.3 require that plenum spaces and ducts meet the same 
criteria or  be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic 
loads and stresses, including buoyancy.
*	2006 and 2003 IPSDC.  Certain types of private sewage disposal 
systems involve placement of earthen fill.  Sections 301, 303, and 
304 are comprehensive in that prior to approval of a disposal 
system, the building official is required to receive written evidence 
that construction in and filling of flood hazard areas is acceptable.  
The code includes a number of restrictions on placement of private 
sewage disposal systems in floodways, and mound systems are not 
allowed in the flood hazard area (see Section 902).  Section 805 
specifies that new and replacement holding tanks are to be 
protected from flood damage and adequately anchored to counter 
buoyant forces.  Vents and service manholes are to be at least 2 
feet (610 mm) above the regulatory flood elevation established by 
the local jurisdiction.  
*	2006 and 2003 IFGC.  Section 301.11 includes the general 
requirement that appliance installations are to be placed above the 
DFE or protected to prevent water from entering or accumulating 
within appliances, ducts, or plenum spaces.

*	2006 and 2003 International Existing Building Code (IEBC).  
Long-term reduction in exposure to flood hazards is one of the 
reasons that development in flood hazard areas is regulated.  The 
IEBC is organized to address repairs, repairs of damaged buildings, 
alterations, additions, and relocated or moved buildings.  For work 
covered by the IEBC, if the work constitutes substantial 
improvement (including repair of substantial damage), the 
proposed work and the existing building are to be brought into 
compliance with the flood-resistant design requirements for new 
construction.  Certain historic buildings in flood hazard areas are 
not required to be brought into compliance provided they retain 
their historic designation.  
*	2006 and 2003 International Code Council Performance Code? 
(ICC PC?).  This code focuses the user on outcomes rather than 
prescriptive solutions.  Based on building use and occupancy, 
designs are to resist certain event magnitudes such that maximum 
tolerated levels of damage are not exceeded.  Section 501.3.4 
identifies expected loads for design.  The flood with a mean return 
period of 100 years is to be used to determine flood resistance for 
all structures except Performance Group I.

3.3	The NFIP’s Community Rating System and the I-Codes
For more than 30 years, communities that participate in the NFIP have 
recognized flood hazards in their construction and development 
decisions.  Many communities have chosen to guide development towards 
areas of lower risk and new buildings often are located out of harm’s 
way.  Until 1990, the NFIP had few incentives for communities to do 
more than administer the minimum NFIP regulatory provisions and flood 
insurance rates were the same in every community, even though some 
elected to exceed those provisions.

Side bar:
The CRS has three goals:  
1.	Reduce flood losses; 
2.	Facilitate accurate insurance rating; and 
3.	Promote awareness of flood insurance.
End side bar.

The Community Rating System (CRS) was established to encourage 
specific community and state activities that exceed the NFIP minimum 
floodplain management requirements and that have been shown effective 
at reducing damage and claims against the NFIP.  In communities that 
apply to the CRS and are verified as implementing some of those 
activities, citizens who purchase flood insurance benefit from discounted 
premiums.

The amount of flood insurance premium discount is based on a 
Community’s CRS classification.  There are 10 classes, with a 5 percent 
discount for each class.  Class 10 has no premium discount, and Class 1 
yields the maximum discount of 45 percent for policies on buildings in the 
mapped flood hazard area (and 10 percent on buildings not in the mapped 
area).  A community’s CRS classification is based on the number of credit 
points calculated for specific floodplain management activities 
undertaken to meet the goals of the NFIP and the Community Rating 
System.  To be a CRS Class 7 or better, a community must have Building 
Code Effectiveness Grading Schedule (BCEGS) classifications of 6 or 
better for both residential/personal and nonresidential/commercial.  
BCEGS is a measure of both the provisions in the code as they relate to 
natural hazards and a community’s administration of the code.

Participation in the CRS is voluntary.  Any community that is in full 
compliance with the rules and regulations of the NFIP, also called ?good 
standing,? may apply for a CRS classification.  Technical support may be 
requested from your state’s NFIP State Coordinator and the appropriate 
FEMA Regional Office (Appendix D).  The application process is 
described in the CRS Application (FEMA FIA-15A).

Eighteen creditable activities are organized under four categories.  FEMA 
conducted extensive evaluations of all the activities and developed a 
system of credit points.  The points are based on how well each activity 
helps achieve the goals of the CRS.  Communities are welcome to propose 
alternative approaches that go beyond the minimum requirements of the 
NFIP.  FEMA will evaluate alternative approaches to determine how 
much, if any, CRS credit is appropriate.  Table 3-1 lists some of ASCE 
24-05 provisions and notes on corresponding CRS credits.

The IBC incorporates specific requirements of the NFIP, in large measure 
by reference to ASCE 24, Flood Resistant Design and Construction.  
ASCE 24 is organized to apply standards based on the structure cate-
gories used by the I-Codes.  This means that some standards that exceed 
the minimum NFIP requirements are not applied uniformly to all buildings 
and structures in flood hazard areas.  

Side bar:
Adopting the I-Codes yields Community Rating System credit.  
End side bar.

Table 3-1.  Selected ASCE 24-05 Provisions and  
Opportunities for Community Rating System Credits

ASCE 24-05 Provisions
Foundations to be designed for load 
combinations, including flood loads

Community Rating System Notes
Credit for Foundation Protection 

ASCE 24-05 Provisions 
Specific standards for High Risk Flood 
Hazard Areas (alluvial fans, flash flood, 
mudslide, erosion-prone, high velocity, ice 
jam, and debris flow areas)

Community Rating System Notes
Credit based on the portion of the flood 
hazard area that is identified as subject to 
unique flood-related hazards where Special 
Hazards Regulations are applied

ASCE 24-05 Provisions
Based on structure category and type of 
flood hazard area, applies freeboard to 
lowest floor elevation

Community Rating System Notes
Credit for Freeboard, depending on the 
additional height (from 1 to 3 feet) and 
weighted by potential number of structures 
in each structure category

ASCE 24-05 Provisions
Based on structure category and type of 
flood hazard area, applies freeboard to 
utilities and mechanical and electrical 
equipment

Community Rating System Notes
Credit for Other Higher Standards, 
weighted by potential number of structures 
in each structure category 

ASCE 24-05 Provisions
Tanks to be secured against 1.5 times 
potential buoyancy

Community Rating System Notes
Credit for Other Higher Standards

ASCE 24-05 Provisions
Specifies foundation types allowed in flood 
hazard areas subject to high velocity wave 
action and high risk flood hazard areas

Community Rating System Notes
Credit for Other Higher Standards

ASCE 24-05 Provisions
In Coastal A Zones, applies requirements 
for flood hazard areas subject to high 
velocity wave action

Community Rating System Notes
Credit for Other Higher Standards
ASCE 24-05 Provisions
Erosion analysis to establish minimum 
foundation depth in flood hazard areas 
subject to high velocity wave action

Community Rating System Notes
Credit for Special Hazards, prorated by 
percent of flood hazard area that is subject 
to high velocity wave action

ASCE 24-05 Provisions
Minimum warning time specified, and 
emergency operations plan required, for 
use of floodproofing that requires human 
intervention

Community Rating System Notes
Credit for Flood Warning Program, 
weighted by potential number of 
nonresidential buildings

End of Table 3-1

Some activities that are eligible for CRS credit may be required or 
implemented by a state or a regional district, rather than at the local 
level.  For example, some states have regulations that require freeboard, or 
state dam safety programs may meet national standards.  All communities that 
apply for the CRS receive credit based on approved statewide standards and 
activities.  

FEMA periodically reviews each CRS community’s activities and 
performance.  If the credited activities are not being implemented 
properly or fully, credit points and the CRS classification may be revised.  
A community may add, change, or drop creditable activities each year. 

The discount in flood insurance premiums is only one of the rewards that 
a community gains by undertaking activities credited by the CRS.  Other 
reasons include improved public safety, reduced damage to property and 
public infrastructure, avoidance of economic disruption and losses, 
reduction of human suffering, protection of the environment and, most 
importantly, promotion of disaster-resistant communities.

To learn more about the CRS, contact the NFIP State Coordinator, the 
appropriate FEMA Regional Office, or check the NFIP CRS section of 
FEMA’s website at www.fema.gov/business/nfip/crs.shtm.

3.4	Considering Higher Standards
The NFIP sets minimum national standards that apply to all communities, 
regardless of the unique characteristics that may be present.  For a number 
of reasons, states may require higher standards, or communities may elect 
to apply provisions that exceed the minimum NFIP requirements:
*	Flood history may prompt consideration of more restrictive provi-
sions.  
*	Past events may have been more severe than the predicted 1-
percent annual chance flood (also known as the 100-year flood) or 
events may have occurred more often than expected.  
*	Communities may have identified unique hazards associated with 
flooding, including flash flooding, alluvial fan flooding, ice jam 
flooding, mud flows, debris flows, and flood-related erosion and 
bluff failure.
*	Upland development may have altered the runoff conditions, so 
that the magnitude and frequency of flooding have changed since 
the NFIP’s maps were prepared.
*	Advances in recent years have improved the modeling 
methodologies used to develop flood hazard mapping, but it may 
take many years before all current maps are revised to take 
advantage of the improved models. 

Another frequently cited basis for electing to administer a higher standard 
is recognition that the engineering methods used to predict flood discharges 
and water surface elevations are mathematical approximations of the natural 
phenomenon of flooding.  In addition, flood hazard maps may be based on 
topographic maps with wide contour intervals, or flood discharges were not 
computed to anticipate upland development.  
Choosing higher standards, such as freeboard, adds a factor of safety to 
acknowledge that flood hazard area delineation is not a precise science.

The NFIP’s Community Rating System, described in Section 3.3, offers 
credit points to communities that adopt floodplain management 
provisions that exceed the minimum requirements of the NFIP.  The 
maximum number of points available for certain higher regulatory 
standards is summarized in Table 3-2.  Actual points will be determined 
based on the specific provisions of a community’s program.

Table 3-2.  Maximum Allowable Points for Higher Standards
Community Rating System Activity 430:  Higher Regulatory Standards
Maximum CRS Credits  (as of 2006)

Freeboard (up to 3' above BFE)
300 points
Foundation Protection (fill compaction, engineered design)
35 points

Cumulative Substantial Improvement (over specific period)
110 points 

Lower Substantial Improvement Threshold (less than 50%)
90 points

Protect Critical Facilities (to 500-year flood level)
100 points

Protect Flood Storage Capacity (minimize use of fill)
80 points

Protect Natural and Beneficial Floodplain Functions
40 points

Prohibit or Limit Enclosures Below Elevated Buildings 
300 points

Other Higher Standards 
100 points

Land Development Criteria (e.g., low-density zoning)
700 points

Special Hazards Regulations (unique flood-related hazards)
Variable points

State-Mandated Regulatory Standards
45 points

Building Code and Staffing (BCEGS)
190 points

Manufactured Housing (stringent anchoring & elevation)
50 points

Coastal A Zone (regulated to V Zone standards)
650 points

End of Table 3-2.

3.5	Amending the I-Codes to Implement Higher 
Standards
Once you have considered higher standards that are appropriate for your 
Community’s circumstances, then you need to determine the best way to 
implement those standards.  In this section some of the higher standards 
that apply specifically to buildings are described and sample language to 
amend the IBC and the IRC is suggested.  One higher standard, known 
as the Coastal A Zone, is described in Section 3.6. 

Freeboard.  Freeboard is a factor of safety that results in elevating 
buildings above the minimum flood elevation.  Floods can and do rise 
higher than established flood elevations selected for regulatory purposes. 
For riverine waterways, continuing development in upstream watersheds will, 
over time, cause more runoff that may worsen flooding.  Future land use 
conditions, such as increased development and runoff, are presently not taken 
into consideration in FEMA?s flood insurance studies.  One hundred CRS credit 
points are allowed for each additional foot of 
freeboard above the BFE, up to 3 feet (914 mm), for a maximum of 300 
points.  

Side bar:
Communities that adopt a freeboard usually do so to provide an inexpensive yet effective means 
to increase flood protection.  There is another reason that property owners will appreciate.  
When homes are built above the BFE, whether 1 foot (304 mm), 2 feet (610 mm), or 3 feet (914 
mm) higher, owners will qualify for a reduction in NFIP flood insurance premiums ranging from 
20 to 40 percent.
End side bar.

The IBC includes freeboard by reference to ASCE 24 for flood-resistant 
provisions.  Freeboard is required for Category III and Category IV 
buildings (see Section 3.9 for the description of the categories).  ASCE 
does not require freeboard for certain minor buildings (referred to as 
Category I structures) and one- and two-family homes (included in 
Category II structures).  

Side bar:
The report, Evaluation of the National Flood Insurance Program’s Building Standards, examines 
the incremental costs and benefits of adding freeboard to elevated foundations.  The benefits 
include future avoided damage and lower cost NFIP flood insurance.  The report is online at 
www.fema.gov/business/nfip/nfipeval.shtm
End side bar.

The IRC specifies that the lowest floors of homes in flood hazard areas 
must be at or above the DFE.  To incorporate freeboard into the IRC, the 
best way to ensure that designers and builders are aware of the 
requirement is to amend the IRC in every section that cites the DFE, as 
appropriate.  As an alternative, the following sample revision language 
would incorporate freeboard in text that in essence defines the DFE.

Sample code revision language
IRC:  R324.1.3.1 Freeboard.  A freeboard of    *   ft (   *   m) shall be 
added where the design flood elevation or other elevation requirements 
are specified.
* Insert selected freeboard height.

Prohibition on Enclosures Below Elevated Buildings.  Flood hazard 
areas are subject to considerable forces that may be exerted on the 
foundation system and any portion of a building that extends below the 
DFE.  Enclosures below otherwise properly elevated buildings are 
allowable under the NFIP and the I-Codes, provided the enclosures meet 
certain provisions.  However, to minimize obstructing flow and damage 
that can still be sustained, some communities choose to prohibit 
enclosures below elevated buildings altogether.  Prohibiting enclosures 
below elevated buildings may earn CRS credits.  



Sample code revision language
IBC:  1612.4.1  Enclosures below design flood elevation.  Fully 
enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall not be permitted.
Exception.  Crawl spaces that comply with the requirements for 
openings in enclosures below the design flood elevation in ASCE 24.
IRC:  R324.2.2  Enclosed area below design flood elevation.  
Enclosed areas, including crawl spaces, that are below the design flood 
elevation shall: Fully enclosed areas below the design flood elevation 
shall not be permitted.
(1)	Be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or 
storage.   
Exception.  Crawl spaces shall: (remainder of section unchanged)
IRC:  R324.3.4  Walls below design flood elevation.  Delete the 
existing text in its entirety and replace:  Walls and partitions shall not be 
permitted below the elevated floor.
Exception.  Walls constructed with insect screening or open lattice.
IRC:  R324.3.5  Enclosed areas below design flood elevation.  
Delete in its entirety and renumber following section.

Limit the Size of Enclosures Below Elevated Buildings.  Limiting the size 
of enclosures below elevated buildings is another way to minimize flood 
damage.  The NFIP and the I-Codes allow such enclosures that are used 
solely for building access, storage, or parking.  All other uses are 
prohibited.  Enclosures for access and storage do not need to be large, 
otherwise owners may be tempted to convert the areas to uses that are not 
allowed, such as bedrooms, family rooms, bathrooms, and workshops.  
Limiting the size of enclosures to less than 300 square feet (28 m2) yields 
100 CRS credit points.  An additional 50 points are available if the 
regulations require property owners to sign a nonconversion agreement 
whereby they acknowledge the use restrictions and agree not to convert 
enclosures below elevated buildings. 



Sample code revision language
IBC:  1612.4.1  Enclosures below design flood elevation.  Fully 
enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall be no larger than    
*   square feet (   *   m2) in total enclosed area.
Exception.  Crawl spaces that comply with the requirements for 
openings in enclosures below the design flood elevation in ASCE 24.
IRC:  R324.2.2  Enclosed area below design flood elevation.  
Enclosed areas, including crawl spaces, that are below the design 
flood elevation shall:
1.	Be no larger than    *   square feet (   *   m2) in total enclosed 
area.  Retain and renumber two items for allowable uses and 
criteria for flood openings.
Exception.  Crawl spaces that comply with the openings criteria in (3) 
are not limited in size.  
IRC:  R324.3.5  Enclosed area below design flood elevation.  
Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall be:
1.	No larger than    *   square feet (   *   m2) in total enclosed area, 
and
2.  Used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.  
Exception.  Walls constructed with insect screening or open lattice.
* Insert selected size limit.


3.6	The Coastal A Zone
Flood maps for many coastal communities show both "V Zones" and "A 
Zones" along open shorelines.   V Zones are flood hazard areas subject to 
high velocity wave action, where breaking wave heights are greater than 
or equal to 3 feet (914 mm).  Flood hazard areas immediately inland of V 
Zones (and inland of shorelines without V Zones) are labeled on the flood 
maps as A Zones.  These areas experience some wind-driven waves, but 
the breaking wave heights are predicted to be less than 3 feet (914 mm).  

FEMA's field observations in recent years and laboratory research 
have determined that flooding with breaking waves between 1.5 feet 
(457 mm) and 3 feet (914 mm) high produces more damage than 
flooding of similar depths without waves. Therefore, through 
reference to ASCE 24, the IBC requires application of V Zone design 
requirements in areas with such wave conditions, called "Coastal A 
Zones."

The Coastal A Zone is not delineated on flood hazard maps prepared by 
FEMA, but is a zone where wave forces, overland transport of sand, 
debris impacts, foundation scour, and erosion potential should be taken 
into consideration.  Figure 3-1 illustrates the two conditions that must be 
present in order for an area to be a Coastal A Zone:  stillwater depth 
greater than or equal to 2 feet (610 mm), and breaking wave heights 
greater than or equal to 1.5 feet (457 mm).  

The stillwater depth is the vertical distance between the stillwater 
elevation and the ground.  Note that the stillwater depth of at least 2 
feet (610 mm) is necessary, but is not sufficient by itself to render an area 
a Coastal A Zone.  In order for breaking waves to develop, there should 
be few obstructions between the shoreline and the site.  Obstructions 
may block wind and limit the initial growth of waves or may cause 
friction that attenuates wave energy.  Obstructions can include 
buildings, locally high ground, and dense, continuous stands of 
vegetation.

Figure 3-1.  Schematic of Flood Hazard Zones in Coastal Areas
 

Because Coastal A Zones are not delineated on Flood Insurance Rate 
Maps, the question of determining whether the required conditions are 
likely to occur at a site needs to be addressed.  One way to do this is to 
determine the inland extent of the 2-foot (610 mm) stillwater depth and 
assume that breaking waves will develop (i.e., there are no obstructions 
that would damp waves).  Alternatively, a site-specific determination 
can be made by looking at sites and their surroundings, the actual 
surveyed ground elevations, and the estimated wave heights which 
can be calculated using predicted stillwater depths or derived from 
elevations shown on the FEMA flood map.

One way to address the potential for damage due to Coastal A Zone 
waves and potential for scour is to apply the V Zone foundation and 
elevation requirements.  As noted above, the IBC incorporates the Coastal 
A Zone by referencing ASCE 24.  Communities that amend the IRC to 
incorporate the Coastal A Zone may qualify for up to 650 credit points 
under the NFIP's Community Rating System (see Section 3.3).  

Sample code revision language
IRC:  R324.2[Flood hazard areas (including A Zones)
Exception:  In flood hazard areas inland of and contiguous to 
flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action (V 
zones), and flood hazard areas inland of shorelines without 
high velocity wave action, buildings and structures shall be 
designed and constructed in accordance with R324.3.  Areas 
subject to this requirement are those where the stillwater 
depth is greater than or equal to 2.0 feet (610 mm), and 
breaking wave heights are greater than or equal to 1.5 feet 
(457 mm). 


3.7	Substantial Improvement and Substantial 
Damage
The I-Codes definition of substantial improvement is consistent with 
the NFIP.  If a proposed improvement, or the repair of damage due to any 
cause, will cost more than 50 percent of the market value of the building 
before the improvement or repair, then the entire building is to be made 
compliant with the flood-resistant provisions.  This requirement applies to 
all buildings and structures located in all flood hazard areas, except 
designated historic structures.  

To help address many of the questions that often arise, FEMA prepared 
Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings (FEMA 
213). It also has useful information about substantial improvements that 
are not triggered by a damaging event.  Improvements to existing 
buildings generally are one of four types:
3.	Rehabilitation of an older building without modifying its external 
dimensions.
4.	Additions to an existing building that increase the square footage 
and usually involve modifying the structure of the original 
building.
5.	Reconstruction of a building, in whole or in part, on the same 
footprint and foundation.
6.	Restoration or repair of damage of any origin to restore a building 
to its predamaged condition.

Substantial damage may be caused by damage of any nature.  Therefore, 
after a damage event, whether flood, fire, tornado, earthquake, 
vandalism, or any other cause, the substantial damage requirements of the 
I-Codes should prompt field inspections to evaluate damage that may 
trigger the substantial improvement/substantial damage requirements for 
buildings and structures located in flood hazard areas.

After a damage event that affects multiple properties or large areas, 
buildings that are in flood hazard areas should be checked for damage.  
Some communities distribute flyers explaining permit requirements and 
how exposure to future flood damage can be reduced during repairs.  
Most property owners may be unaware that they need permits to repair 
and restore damaged buildings.

Quick action is needed when substantial damage is discovered because 
most owners want to repair or rebuild immediately and get back to 
?normal.?  It is good to keep in mind that if they have been damaged by 
flood, then ?normal? means they are likely to get damaged again by the 
next flood.  After major natural hazard events such as floods, tornadoes, 
and earthquakes, some communities and states organize special permit 
assistance teams or set up recovery center desks where impacted people 
can get help.

Side bar:
Complete with detailed diagrams and explanations, Homeowner’s Guide to Retrofitting:  Six 
Ways to Protect Your House from Flooding (FEMA 312), is a good resource for owners, 
designers, and builders who are considering improvements and repairs.
End side bar.


Following major flooding, states and communities often seek technical 
support and assistance from FEMA to evaluate flood damage.  Contact 
your NFIP State Coordinator or FEMA Regional Office to find out about 
post-disaster assistance that may be available when many damaged build-
ings must be evaluated.  FEMA has developed a user-friendly software 
program, and paper forms, that can be used to help determine whether 
specific buildings have been substantially damaged.  The software is free 
and is included with Guidance on Estimating Substantial Damage Using 
the NFIP Residential Substantial Damage Estimator (FEMA 311), which 
also includes a field workbook and training video on CD-ROM.

2006 and 2003 IBC.  The IBC covers substantial improvement and 
substantial damage in a number of places.  First, the scope of the code is 
broad and includes:
*	101.2 Scope: includes alteration, movement, enlargement, 
replacement, and repair.  Thus, activities that may qualify as 
substantial improvement or substantial repair are included within 
the scope.  
*	105 Permits, 105.1 Required: reinforces intended activities that are 
subject to the requirements of the code, including those that 
enlarge, alter, repair, move, or demolish a building or structure.
*	105.2.3 Repairs: clarifies that applications for permits need not be 
submitted for ordinary repairs, provided such repairs do not 
include certain actions that may affect the structural design and 
other elements of the building.

The IBC includes substantial improvements and restoration of substantial 
damage among activities listed in Section 1612.1 that are to be designed 
and constructed to resist the effects of flood hazards and flood loads.  
Substantial improvement and substantial damage are defined in 
Section 1612.2.  

Importantly, Chapter 34 addresses existing buildings, and specific 
language addresses flood hazard areas:
3402.1  Existing buildings or structures.
Exception:  For buildings and structures in flood hazard areas 
established in Section 1612.3, any additions, alterations or repairs 
that constitute substantial improvement of the existing structure, as 
defined in Section 1612.2, shall comply with the flood design 
requirements for new construction and all aspects of the existing 
structure shall be brought into compliance with the requirements for 
new construction for flood design.

The scope of Chapter 34 is broad, covering the alteration, repair, 
addition and change of occupancy of existing structures.?  These 
definitions are substantially the same as the NFIP terminology:
*	Addition is an extension or increase in floor area or height of a 
building or structure.
*	Alteration is any construction or renovation to an existing structure 
other than repair or addition.
*	Repair is the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing 
building for the purpose of its maintenance.

2006 and 2003 IRC.  The IRC covers substantial improvement and 
substantial damage in three sections:
*	R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged 
existing buildings and structures in areas prone to flooding:  
specifies that the building official shall examine applications and 
prepare a finding with regard to the value of the proposed work.  If 
the value equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the 
building before the damage occurred or the improvement is started, 
the finding is provided to the board of appeals.
*	R112.2.1  Determination of substantial improvement in areas 
prone to flooding:  the board of appeals is to determine if a 
proposal, referred to it by the building official pursuant to Section 
R105.3.1.1, constitutes a substantial improvement (or repair of 
substantial damage).  If the proposed work is found to be a 
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, the work 
must meet the requirements of Section R324.  Section R112.2.1 
sets forth specific work that is not included in the term ?substantial 
damage and that need not be included in the valuation.
*	Appendix J Existing Buildings and Structures, Section AJ102.5 
Flood hazard areas:  specifies that work in existing buildings is 
subject to the provisions of Section R105.3.1.1, described above.

2006 and 2003 IEBC.  The IEBC is organized based on the nature of the 
work:  repairs; repair of damaged buildings; alterations (Levels 1, 2 and 
3); work associated with change of occupancy classification; additions 
(horizontal, vertical, new/raised foundations); and relocated or moved 
buildings.  The provisions of the IEBC that pertain to flood resistance are 
all triggered by the determination of whether the work constitutes 
substantial improvement or substantial damage.  In every instance where 
that occurs, the existing building is required to be brought into compliance 
with Section 1612 of the IBC.  The 2006 IEBC includes as Chapter 3, 
text from IBC Chapter 34 as an alternative compliance method.

The IEBC also includes provisions for historic structures.  The following 
section describes how certain historic structures may be handled.  

3.8	Historic Structures
Work that, by valuation, would be determined to be substantial 
improvement or repair of substantial damage of certain historic structures is 
treated in a different manner than is described in Section 3.7.  If a 
historic structure retains its historic designation, the NFIP does not 
require that it be brought into compliance with the flood-resistant 
requirements.  This provision is found in the I-Codes.  The best way to 
determine if a structure retains its historic designation is to require the 
applicant to have the proposed work reviewed by the appropriate entity that 
makes such designations and keep a copy of the findings in your permanent 
records.

Side bar:
Substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of historic structures may be handled in 
two ways.  After a finding that the structure will retain its historic designation:
*	If you are issuing a building permit for other work, you can cite the exception to the flood 
provisions; or
*	You can issue a variance to the requirements.
End side bar.

It is important to note that only historic structures that meet certain 
criteria that are outlined in the I-Codes need not be brought into 
compliance.  Simply being named historic or being located in an historic 
district does not qualify.  The following language is found in the IBC 
(Section 3407.2), the IRC (Section R112.2.1) and the IEBC (Section 
1001.4) to describe historic structures that are not subject to the 
compliance requirement: 

Exception:  Historic buildings that are: 
1.	Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for listing in 
the National Register of Historic Places; or
2.	Determined by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Interior 
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered 
historic district or a district preliminarily determined to qualify 
as an historic district; or
3.	Designated as historic under a state or local historic 
preservation program that is approved by the Department of 
Interior.  

Simply because a building qualifies for the exception does not relieve you of 
the responsibility to work with the owner to consider measures to 
reduce flood damage and protect historic resources.  Such measures 
include:  elevation on a raised foundation; use of water-resistant materials; 
relocation of flood-prone equipment and utilities; and reconfiguration of the 
use of flood-prone space.


3.9	Critical and Essential Facilities
In general usage, the term critical and essential facilities is used to 
describe buildings and structures that, if destroyed, damaged, or 
functionally-impaired, have the potential to cause serious bodily harm, 
extensive property damage, or disruption of vital socioeconomic activities.  

Critical and essential facilities commonly include public and private 
facilities that a community considers essential for the delivery of vital 
services and for the protection of public safety. They usually include 
emergency response facilities (fire stations, police stations, rescue squads, 
and emergency operation centers, custodial/residential facilities (jails and 
other detention centers, long-term care facilities, hospitals, and other 
health care facilities), schools, emergency shelters, utilities (water 
supply, wastewater treatment facilities, and power), and any other assets 
determined by the community to be of critical importance for the protection 
of the health, safety and welfare. 

Side bar:
The IBC does not define "critical facilities".  The term "essential facilities" is defined in IBC 
Section 1602:  "Buildings and other structure that are intended to remain operational in the event 
of extreme environmental loading from flood, wind, snow or earthquakes."  
End side bar.

The NFIP does not have requirements that are specific to critical and 
essential facilities, although communities should be aware that Federal 
agencies are required to undertake a deliberative decision process when 
federal funding is proposed to be used for certain critical actions, 
including the construction, upgrade, or repair of critical facilities.  (See 
box on the following page).  

The IBC, through reference to ASCE 24, does incorporate some 
additional requirements that apply to critical facilities that are located in 
flood hazard areas and that result in a higher level of flood-resistance 
(Table 3-3).  ASCE 7 classifies buildings and other structures into four 
categories based on occupancy; most critical and essential facilities fall 
into Category III or Category IV, described below: 
*	Category I includes buildings and other structures whose failure 
would represent a low hazard to human life, such as agricultural 
buildings and storage facilities.
*	Category II includes all buildings not specifically included in other 
categories.

Text box:
President's Executive Order 11988 and Critical Facilities
When Federal funding is provided for the planning, design, and construction of new critical 
facilities, or for the repair of existing critical facilities located within the 500-year floodplain, the 
funding agency is required to address additional considerations.  Executive Order 11988, 
Floodplain Management, requires Federal agencies to apply a decisionmaking process to avoid, 
to the extent possible, the long- and short-term adverse impacts associated with the occupancy 
and modification of floodplains, and to avoid the direct or indirect support of floodplain 
development whenever there is a practicable alternative.  If there is no practicable alternative, 
the Federal agency must minimize any adverse impacts to life, property, and the natural and 
beneficial functions of floodplains. 
The executive order establishes the base flood elevation as the minimum standard for all Federal 
agencies. Implementation guidance specifically addresses “critical actions,” which are described 
as those actions for which even a slight chance of flooding would be too great.  The 
construction or repair of critical facilities, such as fire stations, hospitals and clinics, emergency 
operations centers, the storage of hazardous wastes, and the storage of critical records, are 
examples of critical actions.  
After determining that a site is in a mapped flood hazard area, and after giving public notice, the 
Federal funding agency is required to identify and evaluate practicable alternatives to locating a 
critical facility in a 500-year floodplain.  If the Federal agency has determined that the only 
practicable alternative is to proceed, then the impacts of the proposed action must be identified.  
If the identified impacts are harmful to people, property, and the natural and beneficial functions 
of the floodplain, the Federal agency is required to minimize the adverse effects on the flood-
plain and the funded activity.
Having identified the impacts of the proposed action and the methods to minimize these impacts, 
the Federal agency is required to re-evaluate the proposed action.  The re-evaluation must 
consider whether the action is still feasible, whether the action can be modified to relocate the 
facility or eliminate or reduce identified impacts, or if a “no action” alternative should be chosen.  
If the finding results in a determination that there is no practicable alternative to locating a critical 
facility in the floodplain, or otherwise affecting the floodplain, then a statement of findings and a 
public explanation must be provided. 
End text box.


*	Category III includes buildings and other structures that represent a 
substantial hazard to human life in the event of failure, including 
buildings with higher concentrations of occupants such as 
educational facilities with capacities greater than 250 for 
elementary and secondary facilities, 500 for colleges and adult ed-
ucation facilities, or 150 for daycare facilities. 
*	Category IV includes essential facilities such as hospitals, fire and 
police stations, rescue and other emergency service facilities, 
power stations, water supply facilities, aviation facilities, and other 
buildings critical for the national and civil defense. 

Table 3-3.  ASCE 24-05 Provisions Related to Critical Facilities
[Category III and Category IV]

Elevation of 
Lowest Floor or 
Bottom of Lowest 
Horizontal 
Structural Member
A Zone: elevation of lowest 
floor
BFE +1 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
BFE +2 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher

V Zone and Coastal A Zone: 
where the lowest horizontal 
structural member is parallel 
to direction of wave 
approach
BFE +1 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
BFE +1 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher

V Zone and Coastal A Zone: 
where the lowest horizontal 
structural member is 
perpendicular to direction of 
wave approach
BFE +2 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
BFE +2 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
Elevation Below 
which Flood-
Damage-Resistant 
Materials Shall be 
Used
A Zone
BFE +1 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
BFE +2 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher

V Zone and Coastal A Zone: 
where the lowest horizontal 
structural member is parallel 
to direction of wave 
approach
BFE +2 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
BFE +2 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher

V Zone and Coastal A Zone: 
where the lowest horizontal 
structural member is 
perpendicular to direction of 
wave approach
BFE +3 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
BFE +3 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
Minimum Elevation 
of Utilities and 
Equipment
A Zone
BFE +1 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
BFE +2 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher

V Zone and Coastal A Zone: 
where the lowest horizontal 
structural member is parallel 
to direction of wave 
approach
BFE +2 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
BFE +2 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher

V Zone and Coastal A Zone: 
where the lowest horizontal 
structural member is 
perpendicular to direction of 
wave approach
BFE +3 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
BFE +3 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
Dry Floodproofing
A Zone: elevation to which 
dry floodproofing extends
BFE +1 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher
BFE +2 ft or DFE, 
whichever is 
higher

V Zone and Coastal A Zone: 
dry floodproofing not 
allowed
Not applicable
Not applicable

End of Table 3-3

3.10	Increased Cost of Compliance
The requirement to achieve compliance after substantial damage is sus-
tained has been part of the NFIP regulations since 1974.  Standard NFIP 
flood insurance policies issued or renewed since May 1997 include 
coverage called Increased Cost of Compliance. This coverage is intended 
to help cover a substantial part of the cost of bringing a flood-damaged 
building into compliance with the flood-resistant provisions of the 
community’s codes and regulations.  Most buildings in FEMA-mapped 
flood hazard areas that are insured by the NFIP that are declared 
?substantially damaged? by the community will qualify for an additional 
insurance claim payment of up to an amount stated in the flood insurance 
policy.  In 2006, the maximum amount is $30,000; the actual amount that 
is paid is a function of the nature of the work and a determination of 
eligibility of costs.  This additional claim payment may also be used as 
part of the nonfederal cost-share for certain federally funded-flood 
mitigation grants.  

Side bar:
Although not widely available, some private insurance companies do provide flood coverage that 
is not underwritten by the federal govern-ment.  Those policies most likely do not include 
additional coverage to help pay the increased cost of bringing a building into compliance.
End side bar.

Building officials have a significant role in working with property owners 
and insurance adjusters in order for owners to be able to file a claim for 
Increased Cost of Compliance claim payments.  A formal determination of 
substantial damage must be made and a building permit for the work required 
to achieve compliance must be issued.  Contact your NFIP State Coordinator as 
soon as you suspect that flood damage may qualify as substantial damage. 

Side bar:
To help answer questions, FEMA prepared Guidance for State and Local Officials:  Increased 
Cost of Compliance Coverage (FEMA 301).
End side bar.

Increased Cost of Compliance claim payments may be available for 
insured buildings that sustain repetitive flood losses, but only if the 
community has adopted a specific cumulative substantial damage 
provision that either meets or exceeds the definition in the standard flood 
insurance policy.  


4. Community Responsibilities Under the NFIP

If your community participates in the National Flood Insurance Program 
(NFIP), then the responsibilities described in this section are already being 
addressed, although perhaps by an office other than the building 
department.  Worksheet B in Chapter 6 can be used to identify each 
department in your community that has a role in administering the current 
floodplain management regulations.  The NFIP provides flood insurance 
and flood hazard information.  In return, states and communities agree to 
regulate development in flood hazard areas.  

The NFIP was founded on the principle that managing floodplain 
development at the local level will lead to avoidance and minimization of 
future flood damage.  The Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA) provides convincing evidence to support this concept:  Buildings 
that are constructed in compliance with the NFIP requirements sustain 
little or no damage during most floods.

When a community decides to participate in the NFIP it accepts the 
responsibility to adopt, administer, and enforce floodplain management 
provisions that either meet or exceed the minimum NFIP requirements.  
Communities become partners with the federal government.  The 
objectives of the partnership are to reduce safety risks to people, to 
protect the natural and beneficial functions of floodplains, to mitigate 
flood damage to real and personal property, and to create disaster-
resistant communities.

Side bar:
State or local modifications of the flood-resistant provisions of the I-Codes may result in a code 
that does not meet the minimum requirements of the NFIP.  If this happens, in order to continue 
to participate in the NFIP, the state or community must adopt compensating provisions in a 
separate ordinance or regulation.  Before changing any flood-resistant provision of the I-Codes, 
contact your NFIP State Coordinator or the appropriate FEMA Regional Office to discuss the 
impact of the proposed changes.
End side bar.

4.1	Modifications of the I-Codes
Review Chapter 5 about some state actions that may affect how you 
coordinate your building code and NFIP responsibilities.  Check with 
your NFIP State Coordinator and the state building official to determine 
if your state has adopted the International Codes (I-Codes) and if there 
were any modifications to the flood-resistant provisions of the I-Codes.  

As you compare the flood-resistant provisions of the I-Codes to your 
current floodplain management regulations, you may determine that you 
need to adopt amendments to the code or a companion floodplain 
management ordinance in order to retain local standards that exceed the 
minimums in the code.  FEMA encourages communities to adopt higher 
or more restrictive standards and has established the NFIP Community 
Rating System (CRS) to recognize the value of doing so.  Section 3.3 is a 
brief overview of the CRS.  Examples of higher standards, along with 
suggested code revision language, are found in Section 3.4 and Section 
3.5. 

4.2	Regulate All Development
As described in Section 3.1, to participate in the NFIP communities are 
required to regulate all development.  When examining how the I-Codes 
help you to fulfill that responsibility, pay special attention to ensure that 
this requirement is accomplished.  Any activity that is either exempt or 
not covered by the codes must be recaptured in a companion floodplain 
management ordinance.  

4.3	Record Keeping
Keeping complete permit records is a key element of your community’s 
responsibilities under the NFIP.  The I-Codes contain specific 
requirements concerning record keeping: 
*	Section 104.7 of the IBC requires retention of all official records 
“for the period required for retention of public records.”  
*	The NFIP and IBC Appendix G require that records related to 
development in flood hazard areas be maintained permanently and 
that they be available for public inspection and review.  In addition 
to retaining permit files, many communities keep a separate log of 
permits issued in flood hazard areas.
*	Section R104.7 of the IRC requires retention of official records of 
applications, permits and certificates issued, reports of inspections, 
and notices and orders issued.  Such records are to be retained “for 
the period required for retention of public records.”

Side bar:
If your state or community amends or does not adopt the administrative provisions outlined in the 
IBC (including Appendix G) and the IRC, then you must recapture those provisions in a 
companion floodplain management ordinance.  Be sure to review the remainder of this section 
and Section 1.6 for an overview of com-munity responsibilities under the NFIP.
End of side bar.

Required Documentation.  The I-Codes require communities to obtain 
and retain documentation needed to determine that floodplain 
development activities are compliant, including: 
*	Documentation of lowest floor elevations (IBC Sections 109.3.3  
and 1612.5; IRC Sections R109.1.3 and R324.1.9),
*	Documentation of floodproofing (IBC Section 1612.5), 
*	Documentation of the design of flood openings that meet the 
performance specifications (IBC Section 1612.5),
*	In certain circumstances, documentation of breakaway wall design 
(IBC Section 1612.5; IRC Section R324.3.6),
*	Documentation of foundation design, only in flood hazard areas 
subject to high velocity wave action (IBC Section 1612.5; IRC 
Section R324.3.6),
*	Documentation that floodway encroachments will not increase 
flood levels (IBC Appendix G, Section G103.5),
*	Notifications provided to adjacent communities, the state, and 
FEMA for watercourse alterations (IBC Appendix G, Section 
G103.6),
*	Documentation of all floodplain management variance actions, 
including justifications (IBC Appendix G, Section G105.2; IRC 
Section R104.7), 
*	Notifications provided to recipients of floodplain management 
variances of certain cautions [IBC Appendix G, Section G105.7(5); 
IRC Section R112.2.2(5)], and
*	Copies of inspection reports for buildings located in flood hazard 
areas (IBC Appendix G, Section G103.8; IRC Section R104.7).

Biennial Reports to FEMA.  Periodically, FEMA sends Biennial Report 
forms to each participating community.  The information to be reported 
by the community, including updates of previously submitted data, helps 
FEMA and the states plan for technical assistance and flood map needs.  
FEMA is particularly interested in the number of permits issued and 
variances granted.  Accurate record keeping is essential for a community 
to be able to properly complete the Biennial Report forms.

Plan Review and Inspection Checklist.  Some communities use a 
checklist during plan review to verify that appropriate flood-resistant 
provisions have been checked and are acceptable.  The sample plan review 
checklists included in Appendix F are designed to be transferred to the 
inspection staff and used to document that specific flood-resistant 
construction details have been found to be acceptable.  Use of a checklist is 
not required by the NFIP.  However, it is a good way to document plan review 
and compliance.  

4.4	Requiring Other Permits
The NFIP regulations specifically require that communities review 
development proposed in flood hazard areas to ensure that all other 
necessary permits have been received.  Such permits and approvals may 
need to be obtained from federal, state, or local regulatory authorities.  
Examples at the federal level include permitting under Section 404 of the 
Clean Water Act of 1972 and Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act 
of 1899, and consultation or permitting under the Endangered Species 
Act of 1973.  State and regional agencies may also regulate activities in 
flood hazard areas, including activities that impact wetlands, forestry 
resources, dunes, the shoreline or coastal zone, subaquatic vegetation, 
threatened and endangered species, navigation, and waterways.  

Section 105.3.1 of the IBC directs the building official to reject 
applications that do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws.  
Although not defined, pertinent laws include applicable federal, state, or 
other local laws.  IBC Appendix G, Section G103.2 specifically requires that 
proposed developments in flood hazard areas are not to be approved until 
applicants provide proof that other necessary permits have been granted by 
federal or state authorities.  Coordination of multiple permits may help 
applicants to avoid added costs associated with differing requirements. 

4.5	Notifying Potentially Impacted Parties
When an applicant proposes activities that involve alteration of a 
watercourse, IBC Appendix G, Section G103, specifies that the building 
official shall require the applicant to notify FEMA, the state, and adjacent 
communities.  Changes to streams and rivers have the potential to 
significantly alter flow patterns and carrying capacities, which may 
adversely impact upstream, cross-stream, and downstream properties.

The NFIP regulations require that the carrying capacity of an altered 
watercourse be not less than that of the natural watercourse before 
alterations were made.  Engineering analyses are required to demonstrate 
that this requirement is satisfied.  Applicants are to submit a comparison of 
the existing and proposed channel capacities, a description of the proposed 
alterations, land use of the adjacent properties, information about adjacent 
property owners, and an assessment of the potential impacts.

4.6	Evaluating Floodway Impacts
Communities are required to prohibit floodway encroachments, including 
fills, new construction, and substantial improvements, if they would cause 
flood levels to increase more than a designated height.  The designated 
height limit on the allowable increase is found in the floodway tables of a 
community’s Flood Insurance Study.

If a community decides to permit a floodway proposal that could cause 
an increase in the base flood elevation (BFE), a Conditional Letter of 
Map Revision (CLOMR) and floodway map revision must be reviewed 
and issued by FEMA.  Preliminary permit approvals should be 
conditioned on the applicant obtaining the CLOMR.

Side bar:
The floodway is the channel and adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to pass the 
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated 
height, which is specified in the Flood Insurance Study.  Floodways are delineated along most 
waterways that are studied using detailed methods.
End side bar.

4.7	Flood Hazard Map-Related Duties
At a minimum, communities must use the Flood Insurance Rate Map 
(FIRM) and floodway map, if provided by FEMA, in the administration 
of flood-resistant provisions adopted for participation in the NFIP.  Flood 
hazard data that are available from other federal, state, or other sources 
may be used if FEMA has not provided a map or if detailed data are not 
specified, for example, in flood hazard areas without BFE information.  

Communities must notify FEMA and the NFIP State Coordinator if they 
intend to adopt maps showing flood hazard areas that are larger or 
different than those on the FIRMs.  This situation may arise if a 
community conducts a detailed study of an area that was not mapped by 
FEMA.  It may also arise if the community prepares maps of flood hazard 
areas using criteria that are different than the minimum map specifications 
used by the NFIP, such as future watershed development runoff, no-rise 
floodway, or other aspect that would result in a more restrictive flood 
hazard area.  Under these circumstances, the elevation of the flood hazard 
area is referred to as the design flood elevation (DFE).  At a minimum, the 
DFE equals the BFE, which is shown on the FIRM.  
Section 1.13 includes definitions of both DFE and BFE.

Side bar: 
Some flood hazard areas, mapped without benefit of engineering analyses to develop detailed 
BFEs, are shown as “Zone A” on FIRMs.  A valuable resource document is FEMA 265, 
Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas:  A Guide for Obtaining and 
Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations.
End side bar.

Another map-related responsibility pertains to flood hazard areas for 
which base flood elevations are specified but floodway boundaries are 
not designated.  In these flood hazard areas, the NFIP requires 
demonstration “that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, 
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will 
not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one 
foot at any point within the community.” [44 CFR 60.3(c)(10)]  This is 
usually accomplished by requiring applicants to prepare floodway 
analyses using methods acceptable to FEMA.

Communities that participate in the NFIP are required to:
*	Participate in studies to produce or revise the maps.  For the most 
part, flood-prone communities have some level of map issued by 
FEMA.  From time to time, waterways are restudied or new studies 
are conducted in areas without detailed flood elevation data.
*	Adopt map revisions issued by FEMA.  A change to an effective 
NFIP map is called a “map revision.”  The effective map is the 
most recent map.  When a map revision is warranted, FEMA will 
revise and republish the affected map panels and, if necessary, the 
Flood Insurance Study report.  This is referred to as a “physical 
map revision.”  If the scale of the revision is small, or if it affects 
only one property, FEMA will issue a Letter of Map Revision 
(LOMR).  A LOMR describes the changes and officially revises the 
effective map.
*	Retain all versions of the maps.  The most recent map, called the 
?effective? map, is to be used to regulate development in flood 
hazard areas.  Previous versions of the map should be retained for 
historical purposes and in the event permit or enforcement 
decisions need to be reconstructed.
*	Allow for public access to the maps.  Flood hazard maps serve 
multiple purposes.  They are the basis for mortgage lenders 
requiring flood insurance and insurance agents use them to 
determine insurance rates.  Citizens should have ready access to 
the maps so they can better understand flood risks and the 
implications of decisions regarding permits and flood insurance.  
*	Notify FEMA when revisions are needed.  FEMA should be 
notified when a community becomes aware of a significant need 
for a change to the flood hazard maps.

Side bar:
To help applicants gather and complete the data necessary for map changes, FEMA developed 
application and certification forms that are accessible online.  Additional detailed guidance on all 
of the map change processes is found in Appeals, Revisions, and Amendments to NFIP Maps:  
A Guide for Community Officials (FEMA FIA-12).
End side bar.

The following are related to FEMA’s efforts to keep maps current to 
reflect changes in conditions:
*	Map Modernization.  FEMA is in the midst of a multiyear initiative 
to improve and update the nation’s flood hazard maps.  
Partnerships with state, regional, and local stakeholders help to 
facilitate such tasks as collecting, updating, adopting and 
maintaining flood data.  
*	Community boundaries.  Most older FIRMs were issued for 
individual communities, and the areas shown are those within the 
corporate boundaries at the time the map was prepared.  Over time, 
FEMA will convert FIRMs to digital media and will issue them on a 
“countywide” basis rather than individual towns, cities, and the 
unincorporated areas of counties.
*	Engineering analyses of certain proposed activities.  Applications 
for permits for certain proposed activities, such as flood control 
structures, bridges and culverts, waterway alterations, or fill for 
multiple lots, are to be supported with documented engineering 
analyses.  FEMA reviews the analyses to determine whether the 
proposals meet the criteria for a map revision.  FEMA’s initial 
comments are known as “conditional determinations” that are 
issued as CLOMR and Conditional Letters of Map Revision Based 
on Fill (CLOMR-F).  When a project is completed, “as-builts” are 
submitted to support FEMA’s issuance of a final Letter of Map 
Amendment (LOMA) or a physical map revision.
*	Flood fringe fills (individual lots).  In flood hazard areas designated 
as AE Zones, if individual lots are filled so that the buildable 
surface is at or above the BFE or DFE, owners may submit 
documentation and request that FEMA remove the flood hazard 
area designation.  If the fill meets certain criteria, including 
acknowledgment by the community that any structures are 
“reasonably safe from flooding,” then FEMA will issue a Letter of 
Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F).  Without the LOMR-F, 
lenders will require that flood insurance be purchased on buildings 
that, based on the FIRM, appear to be within the mapped flood 
hazard area.
*	Naturally high ground (individual lots).  Because of the scale of 
the original topography and the approximate nature of flood hazard 
mapping techniques, some land areas may have been inadvertently 
included in the mapped flood hazard area.  Land owners may 
submit documentation to show that an individual structure and/or a 
legally described parcel of land is above the BFE.  FEMA will issue 
a LOMA if it is determined that the natural grade of a parcel of 
land is actually above the BFE.  The LOMA applies to only the 
described structure or parcel, and officially amends the effective 
map.

Side bar:
Learn more by reading FEMA’s Technical Bulletin #10, Ensuring that Structures Built on Fill In or 
Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonably Safe From Flooding (NFIP Interim 
Guidance).  
End side bar.

4.8	Elevation Certificates
During construction, certain ground and building elevations are to be 
surveyed and certified so that building officials can determine the 
elevation of the lowest floor.  The lowest floor elevation is the most 
significant element in determining that floodplain construction is 
compliant.  The same elevation certification is used by insurance agents to 
determine appropriate insurance ratings.  A good resource for 
understanding the certification and documentation of elevations is the 
Floodplain Management Bulletin:  Elevation Certificate (FEMA 467-1).  

Side bar:
Many communities attach a blank FEMA Elevation Certificate to the issued permit and clearly 
indicate when it must be completed and submitted.  
End side bar.

IBC Section 109.3.3 and IRC Section 109.1.3 call for inspections when 
the lowest floor level is set and before further vertical construction takes 
place, and elevation data are to be submitted to the building official.  That 
way, errors in the elevation can be corrected with minimal cost and delay.  
Because the building official’s determination of the “lowest floor” is, in 
part, dependent on the location of utilities and the final site grading, 
documentation of the a final “as-built” elevations must be completed and 
sealed when that work is finished.

FEMA’s Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) can be ordered from 
FEMA.  It is available online in the library section of FEMA’s website, 
www.fema.gov/business/nfip/elvinst.shtm.  The form includes several 
pages of instructions and illustrations with specifics for the 
surveyor/engineer and the building official:  
*	Surveyor/Engineer.  A registered professional who is licensed to 
perform elevation surveys is required to complete, sign, and affix a 
professional seal to the documentation of elevations.  The 
documentation must be dated to document when the elevations 
were surveyed because continuing construction or future 
modifications could alter and/or outdate the information.  The 
registered professional is responsible for obtaining and certifying 
accurate elevations of key ground and building elevations.
Using the diagrams provided by FEMA, the registered professional 
determines which building elevations to survey by selecting the 
building diagram that most closely represents the actual building.  
If the diagrams do not match the configuration of the building, the 
registered professional may need to note in the comment section to 
clarify the diagram selected.  The Elevation Certificate and building 
diagrams specify the various elevations that are to be surveyed or 
measured, including:
?	The bottom floor and the next higher floor;
?	The floor of enclosures, attached garages, below-grade areas, 
and the interior grade of crawl spaces; 
?	Lowest elevation of machinery, appliances and other utility 
equipment servicing the building;
?	For buildings in flood hazard areas subject to high velocity 
wave action, the top of floors and the bottom of the lowest 
horizontal structural members;
?	For all buildings, the highest and lowest adjacent grades; and
?	For buildings with enclosures below the elevated floor, the 
number and total net area of flood openings that are within 12 
inches (305 mm) of the adjacent grade are to be noted on the 
certificate. 
*	Building Official.  The issued building permit should clearly specify 
the DFE and the minimum elevation of the lowest floor (including 
basement).  When documentation of the elevations is submitted by a 
registered design professional, it is the building official’s 
responsibility to determine that all required surveyed elevations and 
information are noted on the “as-built” certification.
If all the required elevations have been surveyed, the building 
official then determines which level is the lowest floor and 
compares its ?as-built? elevation to the DFE.  This comparison 
determines whether the building is compliant with the elevation 
provisions of the code.  If not compliant, enforcement action should 
be initiated immediately.

In determining the lowest floor, two factors should be kept in mind:
*	In flood hazard areas not subject to wave action (A Zones), if an 
enclosed area below an elevated building has flood openings, has 
flood-resistant materials, and if it is used only for parking, building 
access, or storage*, then it is not considered the ?lowest floor.? 
*	In areas subject to high velocity wave action (V Zones), if an 
enclosed area beneath an elevated building has breakaway walls, 
flood-resistant materials, and is used only for parking, building 
access, or storage*, then it is not considered the ?lowest floor.?

*	Enclosures intended for access and limited storage do not need to be 
large; 
otherwise, owners may be tempted to convert the areas to uses that are not 
permissible, such as bedrooms, family rooms, bathrooms, and workshops.  
Anything stored is subject to flooding.  Therefore, only limited storage 
should 
be allowed.  Storage does not include working appliances such as freezers, 
refrigerators, and washers and dryers.

A copy of the documentation of elevations (e.g., FEMA?s Elevation 
Certificate) is to be placed in the community?s permanent permit file.  To 
facilitate reporting to FEMA and the state, some communities keep a 
separate log with information on flood hazard area permits.  At a later 
date, if documentation of elevations is not found in the file, the 
community will be required to obtain a replacement to verify proper 
administration of the NFIP requirements.

Side bar:
Certain other design documentation may  
be required:  
*	Floodproofing, for certain nonresidential buildings designed to be watertight. 
*	Piles or columns, for buildings in flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action. 
*	Breakaway walls, only if anticipated loads exceed certain values set forth in the code.
*	Flood openings, if flood openings do not conform to the prescriptive specifications in the 
code.
End side bar.

4.9	Inspections
Even when building permits and construction plans are complete, good 
inspection and enforcement procedures are important.  Building 
inspectors need to understand the flood-resistant design and construction 
requirements that they are to check.  If deviations from the conditions of 
the permit are found early during construction, it is easier to work with 
the owner and builder to achieve compliance through corrective actions. 

Using a plan review and inspection checklist (examples in Appendix F) 
can make inspections easier because the inspector will have a standardized 
summary of flood-related requirements that are not seen in non-floodplain 
buildings.  A checklist also documents the inspection, which can be 
important for maintaining a community’s good standing in the NFIP. 

The following summarizes some of the inspections that can be performed 
to facilitate compliance with flood-resistant provisions: 
*	Stake Out or Site Inspection.  The best time to make sure a building 
will be located correctly is during the site inspection when setbacks 
and distances from the watercourse or floodway can be checked.  
Checking that the lowest floor is properly elevated is easier if there 
is a nearby elevation benchmark or reference mark.  If one of the 
reference marks shown on the flood hazard map is not close to the 
site, placement of a temporary reference mark on site can make it 
easier to check the elevation when the floor level is set, and to 
certify the elevation when the as-built documentation of 
elevations is completed.  
*	Fill Inspection.  Fill that is placed to structurally support an 
elevated building should be inspected to check compaction and 
compaction reports should be collected.  It is also important to 
check that the final elevation of the fill is as high as required by the 
permit because this will affect the final elevation of the lowest 
floor.
*	Footing or Foundation Inspection.  For solid perimeter foundation 
walls that will create enclosures below otherwise elevated buildings 
(crawlspaces), inspectors should check for the specified number, 
size, and location of flood openings.  Flood openings are to be 
close to the ground and should not be confused with under-floor 
air ventilation openings, which are located just under the floor 
level.  For slab-on-grade (and stemwall) buildings, the lowest floor 
inspection is conducted at this time.
*	Lowest Floor Inspection.  Under Sections 109.3 of the IBC and 
R109.1.3 of the IRC, documentation of the lowest floor elevation 
is to be submitted.  An important part of administering provisions 
for flood-resistant construction is making sure that buildings are 
elevated properly.  The best time to verify compliance is when the 
lowest floor elevation is set and before further vertical construction 
takes place.  An error of a foot or two in elevation may seem 
minor, but correction can be expensive and complicated if that 
error is discovered once the walls and roof are in place.  In 
addition, federal flood insurance is very costly for new buildings 
that are constructed with the lowest floor below the DFE.
*	Final Inspection.  A final inspection to document compliance with 
the floodplain management requirements of the I-Codes can be 
done at the same time as the final inspection to issue the occupan-
cy certificate.  During the final inspection, the important things to 
check include:
?	Verify that utilities and other building elements are located 
properly, usually above the DFE.  Frequently overlooked 
items include: heating, cooling, and ventilation equipment; 
electrical outlets; plumbing fixtures; and ductwork that is 
installed under the floor, usually in a crawlspace.
?	In flood hazard areas not subject to high velocity wave action 
(A Zones), inspect enclosures below elevated buildings to 
ensure the flood openings are correct in number, total net 
open area, and placement.  If standard air ventilation units are 
used as flood vents, the closure mechanism must be 
permanently disabled so that floodwater can automatically 
enter and exit freely, without any human intervention.
?	In flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action 
(V Zones), inspect enclosures below elevated buildings to 
determine that breakaway walls are constructed to break away 
freely without causing damage to the building’s foundation or 
the elevated portion of the building.  To minimize transfer of 
loads during flood conditions, utility connections are not to be 
mounted on, or penetrate through, breakaway walls.
?	For enclosed areas below the DFE, check that the approved 
use (only parking, storage, and building access) appears to be 
consistent with what has been built.  
?	Check that exterior fill is placed according to the approved 
plans and specifications, and that next to all sides of the 
foundation the fill is not higher than the interior slab or grade 
of crawl spaces (unless the interior crawlspace grade is filled 
to above the DFE). 
?	Verify that flood damage-resistant materials are used below 
the DFE.  Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin Flood-Resistant 
Material Requirements for Buildings Located in Special Flood 
Hazard Areas (FEMA FIA-TB #2). 
?	Examine building utility systems and equipment to determine 
if they have been elevated or otherwise installed according to 
plans to resist flood damage.  Heat pumps and pad-mounted 
air-conditioning units must be elevated.
?	Collect the ?as-built? documentation of elevations prior to the 
final sign-off and issuance of occupancy certificates.
?	If used, complete and sign the plan review and inspection 
checklist and place all inspection reports in the permit file. 
*	Post-Damage Inspections.  After a flood or any event that causes 
significant damage, buildings located in flood hazard areas should 
be inspected.  Some communities distribute flyers explaining 
permit requirements and how future flood damage can be reduced 
during the repair process.  Most homeowners do not realize that 
they may need permits to repair and restore damaged buildings if 
they are in flood hazard areas.  Damage that may meet the 
?substantial damage? definition must be addressed in accordance 
with the applicable provisions of the I-Codes (see Section 3.7).

4.10	Enforcement and Violations
Proper enforcement of the floodplain management provisions is a critical 
part of a community’s responsibility under the NFIP.  During 
construction, violations of these provisions are to be resolved as soon as 
they are discovered and before further construction takes place.  What 
may appear to be a minor violation could end up being expensive when 
the owner purchases NFIP flood insurance.  A community’s standing in 
the NFIP depends on making a good faith effort to successfully resolve 
violations.  By allowing any violation to go unresolved, the community 
may set a precedent, making it more difficult to take future enforcement 
actions.

Perhaps one of the more persuasive arguments for adopting the I-Codes is 
to consolidate enforcement authority for flood-resistant design and 
construction provisions.  The building department typically has 
mechanisms in place to aggressively handle code violations, while 
planning and zoning departments may not. 

4.11	The Variance Process
For the purposes of the NFIP, a variance is a grant of relief from the 
application of the NFIP floodplain management requirements.  A variance 
allows construction in a manner that is otherwise prohibited.  Variances 
are granted for floodplain management purposes only.  A community may 
issue a variance to allow a building to be constructed in a manner that is at 
variance to the minimum NFIP provisions, but NFIP flood insurance will 
still be rated according to risk and might be prohibitively expensive.  

The primary goals of the flood-resistant provisions of the code are to 
reduce damage and to protect public health and safety for the entire 
community.  Achieving these goals also results in disaster-resistant and 
livable communities.  Very few variances to the floodplain management 
provisions can be justified.  A variance should not be granted if a 
proposed activity increases the susceptibility of buildings and people to 
flooding and flood damage.  

As a guiding principle, a variance should pertain to the unique 
characteristics of the land itself.  A properly issued variance may be 
granted for a parcel of land with physical characteristics so unusual that 
complying with the code would create an exceptional hardship for the 
applicant.  A variance should not be granted based on the personal 
circumstances of an individual.  


Side bar:
Communities are encouraged to consult with either the NFIP State Coordinator or the 
appropriate FEMA Regional Office prior to issuing variances.
Even if allowed by a properly issued variance, NFIP flood insurance on a building that is only 1 
or 2 feet (305 or 610 mm) below the BFE may cost two to three times more than if the lowest 
floor of the building is at the minimum elevation.
End side bar.

2006 and 2003 IBC.  Section 112 creates a board of appeals to hear and 
decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the 
building official.  Specific requirements, considerations, and conditions 
for issuing variance from floodplain management requirements can be 
found in IBC Appendix G, Section G105.

2006 and 2003 IRC.  Section R112 creates a board of appeals to hear 
appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building 
official.  The board of appeals has specific responsibilities related to 
flood hazard area development:
*	R112.2.1 Determination of substantial improvement in areas prone 
to flooding:  requires the board of appeals to evaluate the building 
official’s finding regarding the value of proposed improvements to 
existing buildings to determine if the work constitutes a substantial 
improvement, and
*	R112.2.2 Criteria for issuance of a variance for areas prone to 
flooding:  sets forth specific criteria, consistent with the minimum 
NFIP requirements, to be applied in the review and consideration 
of variances to the minimum flood hazard area requirements.

Side bar:
If the administrative sections of the I-Codes (including Appendix G) are not adopted, the 
variance provisions must be recaptured in a companion floodplain management ordinance.
End side bar.

5. State Building Codes and Flood Provisions

States handle building codes in a number of ways that can affect whether 
and to what extent communities can rely on the code to participate in the 
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).  Regardless of how your state 
does it, you need to be sure that state-level amendments do not jeopardize 
the minimum flood-resistant provisions.  In addition, in order to achieve the 
level of flood protection desired by your community (especially if you 
participate in the Community Rating System and administer any higher 
standards), you will need to coordinate your amendments with both the state 
building code agency and the NFIP State Coordinator.

Whether the building codes are adopted at the state level for local 
administration or adopted at the local level, either way will affect how 
you will reference the flood hazard maps that are the basis for regulation 
(see Section 5.6).  

Side bar:
You may need to develop a companion floodplain management ordinance to assure that all NFIP 
requirements are addressed.
End side bar.

5.1	Meeting More Restrictive State Requirements
Many states have specific requirements that apply to development in 
flood hazard areas.  Typically the requirements are set forth in statutes or 
regulations that are under the jurisdiction of the natural resource, 
community development, or emergency management agency.  

The NFIP State Coordinator can identify all specific state requirements.  
Some of the more common higher standards provisions imposed by state 
regulations include freeboard, more restrictive floodway encroachment 
limits, setbacks, and factors to address erosion.  

Side bar:
Freeboard is the most common state floodplain requirement that exceeds NFIP minimums.  It is 
found in the statutes or regulations of 15 states.  Section 3.4 offers sample language to capture 
this requirement in the I-Codes.
End side bar.

5.2	State Amendments to the I-Codes
Before considering any amendment to the International Codes? (I-Codes) 
that are related to flood hazard areas and flood-resistant construction, the 
state agency that is responsible for the state code should work with the NFIP 
State Coordinator and the appropriate Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) regional office.  Whether amendments are 
proposed at the state level or local amendments are approved at the state 
level, care must be taken to ensure that modifications are consistent with 
the requirements for the NFIP.  Otherwise, the burden falls to 
communities to resolve inconsistencies in their floodplain management 
ordinances.

5.3	Local Amendments to State Building Codes
One of the primary purposes for a statewide building code is consistency 
between communities.  For this reason, some states do not allow 
communities to amend the code.  However, most state building code 
authorities have a mechanism by which communities can seek approval to 
adopt amendments to the code to address local circumstances with 
adequate justification.  

Many communities have incorporated in their floodplain management 
ordinances provisions that exceed the minimum requirements of the 
NFIP, and the justifications for those higher standards may vary from 
community to community.  Common justifications include the need to 
provide a greater degree of protection given a community’s history of 
flooding or to recognize uncertainties in modeling and mapping the flood 
hazard.  In addition, lower federal flood insurance premiums may be 
available if a community participates in the NFIP?s Community Rating 
System (see Section 3.3).  Incorporating those higher standards into your 
local building code may require approval by the state building code 
agency or you may decide to capture them in the companion floodplain 
management ordinance.

5.4	Exemptions from State Building Codes
The I-Codes list specific types of work that are exempt from the permit 
requirements of the codes.  Some state building codes identify additional 
specific activities or additional types of buildings that also are exempt.  
Examples that have been identified include buildings under a certain size, 
manufactured housing units installed according to a manufacturer’s 
instructions, agricultural buildings and structures, and structures and 
activities undertaken by specific industries such as mining or logging.  

As described in Section 3.1, NFIP minimum standards require that 
participating communities apply floodplain management requirements to 
all development in flood hazard areas.  If your state exempts specific 
activities or types of buildings from the state building code, you must 
recapture them in a companion floodplain management ordinance to 
ensure compliance with the NFIP requirements.

5.5	Direct State Regulation of Certain Activities or Buildings 
Some states issue building permits for certain activities or specific types 
of occupancies or buildings that are then exempt from a local building 
permit.  For example, some states issue permits and conduct inspections of 
all public school buildings, some states regulate certain other public 
buildings, and some states regulate the installation of manufactured homes in 
manufactured home parks.  

In situations where the state has direct regulatory authority, the authority 
to address the floodplain development aspects may be shared between the 
community and the state.  For example, the community may approve a project 
under its zoning ordinance or floodplain management ordinance, while the 
state requires compliance with codes pertaining to design and construction.  

Check with your state building code official and the NFIP State 
Coordinator to determine whether these or similar situations exist in your 
state.  Coordinated actions may be necessary to ensure that all NFIP 
requirements are adequately addressed.  You may need to recapture in a 
companion floodplain management ordinance those activities that are 
authorized by the state.

5.6	Referencing Flood Maps in the Building Codes
FEMA prepares Flood Insurance Studies and Flood Insurance Rate Maps 
(FIRMs) for flood-prone communities.  Some waterways studied using 
detailed engineering methods show floodways, which may be shown on 
the FIRM or on a separate Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.  FIRMs 
and floodway maps serve as the minimum basis for delineating flood 
hazard areas within which development is regulated.  A growing number 
of communities develop and adopt their own maps, often using a basis 
that results in higher predicted water surface elevations and greater areas 
subject to regulation.  Section 1.13 describes the base flood elevation (BFE) 
developed by the NFIP and the design flood elevation (DFE) that is referenced 
by the I-Codes.  

Flood hazard areas are established in the International Building Code? 
(IBC [see Section 1612.3] and in the International Residential Code? 
(IRC) [see Table R301.2(1)].  In both, the governing body is to adopt a 
flood hazard map and supporting data.  At a minimum, FIRMs, floodway 
maps, and Flood Insurance Studies prepared by FEMA shall be cited:  
*	IBC Section 1612.3, Establishment of flood hazard areas: 
specifically requires the governing body to adopt a flood hazard 
map and supporting data.  The text calls for insertion of the name 
of the jurisdiction and the date of issuance of the map and study.  
When the code is adopted at the local level, this approach works 
well.  When the IBC is adopted at the state level for local 
administration, each community will need to cite its study and the 
dates of all effective maps in the companion floodplain 
management ordinance.
*	IRC R301.2, Climatic and geographic design criteria:  requires 
local jurisdictions to establish criteria in Table R301.2(1).  The 
table is designed for insertion of criteria that may vary from 
community to community, such as wind speed, seismic design 
category, and other criteria.  For flood hazards, the table requires 
each community to insert the date of entry into the NFIP and the 
dates of the FIRMs, floodway maps, or other maps adopted by the 
community.  

Side bar:
Most communities have FIRMs with more than one panel.  Each map panel may have a different 
date.  It is important that the date of each currently effective map panel be identified.  
Check with your NFIP State Coordinator to learn how map revisions should be handled.  
End side bar.

6. Your Community’s Approach

Regulating flood hazard area development is not a ?one-size-fits-all? 
process.  Communities vary considerably both within a state and across 
the country.  Each state has its own statutes and regulations, which may 
mandate  or limit  how a community approaches building codes, other 
health and safety codes, and floodplain management regulations.  

The International Codes? (I-Codes) include the provisions pertinent to 
buildings that are the minimum necessary to meet the National Flood 
Insurance Program (NFIP) floodplain management requirements [other 
provisions are included in the International Building Code? (IBC?), 
Appendix G].  Your community needs to assess the current approach used 
to satisfy the requirements of the NFIP in order to determine the best way to 
coordinate the building code with your current land planning, zoning, and 
regulatory framework.  

Before working through the process, you should review Chapter 5 and 
contact the NFIP State Coordinator and the state building code official to 
learn about state-specific requirements.  States that adopt the I-Codes at 
the state level may have made amendments or may require that local 
amendments be approved by the state.  Some states have specific 
requirements for flood hazard area development and some issue 
floodplain permits.  Others exempt certain activities or types of buildings 
from the requirement to obtain a building permit, and some states may issue 
building permits for some activities.  

6.1	Assessing Your Community’s Current Approach
Perhaps the most important issue that you need to consider is whether the 
I-Codes will replace some or all of requirements in your current floodplain 
management regulations.  During this consideration, you may want to use the 
crosswalks in Appendices B, Cm and D to compare specific sections of the 2006 
editions of the I-Codes with the NFIP regulations.

Side bar:
The I-Code texts in the appendices are annotated to show code changes approved in the 
2006/2007 cycle and published in the 2007 Supplement.
End side bar.

The worksheets on pages 6-4 and 6-5 are useful tools to assess your 
Community’s current approach.  Worksheet A lists certain functions and 
regulatory requirements related to the flood-resistant provisions of the 
NFIP.  Across the top are listed the I-Codes in which those functions and 
requirements can be found.  Worksheet B is set up for use in the 
following manner:
*	Across the top you can list all of your community’s departments 
that are involved in regulating flood hazard areas.  The typical 
departments are listed, and space is provided for you to add others, 
if appropriate to your community’s organization.
*	Consider the functions and regulatory requirements of the NFIP 
that are listed on the right.  Mark the table to indicate the 
department that currently is responsible for each, keeping in mind 
that more than one department may share some responsibilities.  
Representatives from each of these departments should be invited 
to participate in the decision process that comes next.

6.2	Modifying Your Community’s Approach
The next step you need to take to coordinate the I-Codes is to get 
together with representatives of all departments that currently have a role 
in floodplain management, as noted on Worksheet B.  More than likely, a 
series of meetings will be needed.  The topics and objectives suggested in 
Worksheet C (page 6-6) may help you lay out the steps needed to produce 
a clearly coordinated approach to managing flood hazard areas.   

Chapter 2 outlined three approaches that should be reviewed to 
understand your options:  the comprehensive approach; the stand-alone 
floodplain management regulations approach; and the building code 
approach.  Review Chapter 3 to look at some options to consider, such as 
higher standards.  Be sure that your discussions touch on all of 
community responsibilities listed in Chapter 4 so that each one is assigned 
to the appropriate office.  And, before you get too far along, review Chapter 
5 and check with the appropriate state offices to understand state-specific 
requirements and processes. 

The purpose of the initial session with representatives of different 
departments in your community is to determine your approach (see Figure 
6-1) and to start the process of effectively integrating the I-Codes.  Keep 
the following objectives in mind:  
*	All NFIP requirements must be addressed;
*	If flood-related provisions are addressed in multiple codes or 
regulations, then coordination is critical to avoid overlap, 
conflicting provisions, and duplication;
*	A department must be designated to be responsible for each code 
or regulation related to floodplain management; and
*	Communication between the departments that deal with related 
provisions needs to be arranged to facilitate the development 
review process.

Figure 6-1.  Approaches to Fulfilling the Requirements of the NFIP


Worksheet A.  The NFIP and the I-Codes

National Flood Insurance Program Provisions and Processes

The International Codes 
IBC
IBC App. G
IRC
IEBC
IPC
IMC
IPSDC
IFGC

Planning and Zoning
1.	Compatibility with conservation, resource, or overlay zoning (density, 
setbacks, etc.).
2.	Consideration of overall planning objectives, including flood hazard 
reduction objectives.
3.	Storm water management and drainage.
4.	Subdivision of land.

Development Review
1.	Changes to land (filling, grading, paving, 
excavation, mining, dredging, drilling, channel 
modifications, alteration of sand dunes and/or 
mangrove stands).
2.	One- and two-family dwellings (except in 
floodways).


3.	Buildings and structures (including tanks, towers, 
and one- and two-family dwellings in floodways).
4.	Site-related public/private utilities (sewage 
disposal, water supply).
5.	Building utilities (electrical, plumbing, HVAC, 
fuel).
6.	Existing buildings and structures (additions, 
alterations, repairs, rehabilitations).
7.	Site development (water, sewer, drainage, on-site 
waste disposal systems).
8.	Transportation infrastructure (roads, bridges, 
culverts).
9.	Other water resources infrastructure (dams, 
ponds, levees, floodwalls).
10.	Placement/replacement of manufactured housing.
11.	Recreational vehicle parks.
12.	Refer to other federal, state, local agencies and 
require appropriate permits.
13.	Review and grant of variances.

Records
1.	Maintain records of corporate boundaries; report 
changes to FEMA.
2.	Maintain record of permits and variances, 
including documented elevations (Elevation 
Certificates) and documented floodproofing 
designs (Floodproofing Certificates); make 
available for public inspection.
3.	Maintain flood hazard maps; make available for 
public inspection.
4.	Identify, record, and report map needs to FEMA.

Inspection and Enforcement
1.	Subdivision lot layout (with respect to flood 
hazard areas).
2.	Location of building/structure footprints on lot.
3.	Foundations.
4.	Lowest floor elevation (buildings and structures).
5.	Lowest floor elevation (manufactured housing 
units).
6.	Enclosure below lowest floor (flood openings or 
breakaway).
7.	Collect/review documentation (elevation, 
floodproofing, flood openings, breakaway wall).
8.	Damaged buildings (to determine if building is 
substantially damaged).


Worksheet B.  Assessing Your Community’s Approach

Your Community’s Organization

Provisions and Processes (Check which department handles  
each code provision or function)
Planning
Zoning
Sub-division
Health
Flood Control or Storm Water
Engineering or Public Works
Building Code
Other
Other
Other

Planning and Zoning  
1.	Compatibility with conservation, resource, or 
overlay zoning (density, setbacks, etc.).
2.	Consideration of overall planning objectives, 
including flood hazard reduction objectives.
3.	Storm water management and drainage.
4.	Subdivision of land.

Development Review  

1.	Changes to land (filling, grading, paving, 
excavation, mining, dredging, drilling, channel 
modifications, alteration of sand dunes and/or 
mangrove stands).
2.	One- and two-family dwellings (except in 
floodways).
3.	Buildings and structures (including tanks, towers, 
and one- and two-family dwellings in floodways).
4.	Site-related public/private utilities (sewage 
disposal, water supply).
5.	Building utilities (electrical, plumbing, HVAC, fuel).
6.	Existing buildings and structures (additions, 
alterations, repairs, rehabilitations).
7.	Site development (water, sewer, drainage, on-site 
waste disposal systems).
8.	Transportation infrastructure (roads, bridges, 
culverts).
9.	Other water resources infrastructure (dams, 
ponds, levees, floodwalls).
10	Placement/replacement of manufactured housing.
11.	Recreational vehicle parks.
12.	Refer to other federal, state, local agencies and 
require appropriate permits.
13.	Review and grant of variances.

Records  
1.	Maintain records of corporate boundaries; report 
changes to FEMA.
2.	Maintain record of permits and variances, 
including documented elevations (Elevation 
Certificates) and documented floodproofing 
designs (Floodproofing Certificates); make 
available for public inspection.
3.	Maintain flood hazard maps; make available for 
public inspection.
4.	Identify, record, and report map needs to FEMA.

Inspection and Enforcement  
1.	Subdivision lot layout (with respect to flood 
hazard areas).
2.	Location of building/structure footprints on lot.
3.	Foundations.
4.	Lowest floor elevation (buildings and structures).
5.	Lowest floor elevation (manufactured housing 
units).
6.	Enclosure below lowest floor (flood openings or 
breakaway).
7.	Collect/review documentation (elevation, 
floodproofing, flood openings, breakaway wall).
8.	Damaged buildings (to determine if building is 
substantially damaged).


Worksheet C.  Discussion Topics, Decision Steps
 
Steps
 
Actions
Date 
Completed

1
Identify all offices involved in floodplain management (Worksheet B), 
circulate this guide as background, and convene a meeting.

2
Review how each of the NFIP functions and regulatory requirements is met 
under your current approach to floodplain management.

3
Review Chapter 3 to understand additional floodplain management 
implications of using the I-Codes to participate in the NFIP.  This chapter 
also briefly discusses some opportunities to further reduce the impacts of 
flooding beyond those required under the NFIP.

4
Review Chapter 5 and check with the NFIP State Coordinator and the state 
building code agency for state-specific requirements.

5
Review Worksheet A to understand which of the NFIP functions and 
requirements are addressed in each of the I-Codes.

6
Discuss the NFIP functions and requirements that are currently performed 
by offices other than those that are responsible for administering the 
various building codes (Worksheet B).

7
Determine which of the I-Codes your community is required to adopt by 
state law, or which you will choose to adopt if your state does not have a 
requirement.  Refer to Figure 6-1 to see how this determination influences 
how you handle development that is covered by IBC Appendix G.

8
Review Worksheet B again with respect to how the NFIP functions and 
requirements are currently addressed.  Decide whether those functions and 
requirements will continue to be administered by the noted offices, which 
may be appropriate to the comprehensive approach and to effectively 
guide development as part of the planning, zoning, and subdivision 
processes.

9
Identify which functions and requirements will be administered by the 
building department upon adoption of the I-Codes.

10
If the decision is to consolidate some or all of those functions and 
requirements in the building department, then a critical review of all of the 
existing ordinances that address floodplain management provisions must be 
prepared to determine if there are any elements that are not covered by the 
I-Codes.  Those elements must be recaptured either by amending the I-Codes or 
by inclusion in a companion floodplain management ordinance.

11
If elements are to be recaptured, review the I-Codes and prepare the 
appropriate language to be included in the Ordinance for Adoption.

12
Review Sections 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 to understand how certain higher 
standards may be beneficial to your community.

13
If your community decides to adopt higher standards, prepare the 
appropriate language to be included in the Ordinance for Adoption.

14
Prepare the companion floodplain management ordinance to retain only 
those provisions not covered by the I-Codes.

15
Submit the Ordinance for Adoption of the I-Codes, plus the companion 
floodplain management ordinance, to your NFIP State Coordinator.  The 
NFIP State Coordinator will coordinate with the FEMA Regional Office to 
review the materials and determine whether they are acceptable for your 
community’s continued participation in the NFIP. 


Appendix A. References and Online Resources


FEMA publications and forms may be obtained at no cost.  These and 
other materials may also be available online at 
http://www.fema.gov/library/index.jsp. 

Hardcopy publications and forms may be ordered from:
DHS/FEMA  
P.O. Box 2012 
Jessup, Maryland  20794-2012 
Toll free:  1-800-480-2520

APA PAS #473, Subdivision Design in Flood Hazard Areas.  
Washington, DC:  American Planning Association, 1997.

ASCE 7-98, Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures.  
Reston, VA:  American Society of Civil Engineers, 1998.

ASCE/SEI 7-05, Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other 
Structures.  Reston, VA:  American Society of Civil Engineers, 2005.

ASCE/SEI 24-05, Flood Resistant Design and Construction.  Reston, VA:  
American Society of Civil Engineers, 2005.

ASFPM and Federal Interagency Floodplain Management Task Force, 
Addressing Your Community’s Flood Problems:  A Guide for Elected 
Officials.  Madison, WI:  Association of State Floodplain Managers, Inc., 
1996.

FEMA, 44 CFR, Part 59-60, National Flood Insurance Program.  
Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency Management Agency, 1990.

FEMA Federal Insurance Administration, Code Compatibility Report.  
Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency Management Agency, 1992.

FEMA FIA-12, Appeals, Revisions, and Amendments to NFIP Maps:  A 
Guide for Community Officials.  Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, 1993. 

FEMA FIA-15A, CRS Application.  Washington, DC:  Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, 
2002.

FEMA 55CD (3rd edition), Coastal Construction Manual:  Principles And 
Practices of Planning, Siting, Designing, Constructing, And Maintaining 
Residential Buildings in Coastal Areas.  Washington, DC:  Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, 2000.

FEMA 85, Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas.  
Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency Management Agency, 1985.

FEMA 213, Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged 
Buildings.  Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency Management Agency, 
1991.  

FEMA 259, Engineering Principles and Practices for Retrofitting Flood 
Prone Residential Buildings.  Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, 1995.

FEMA 265, Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A 
Areas:  A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-Year) Flood 
Elevations.  Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency Management Agency, 
1995.  

FEMA 301, Guidance for State and Local Officials:  Increased Cost of 
Compliance Coverage.  Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, 2003.  

FEMA 311, Guidance on Estimating Substantial Damage Using the NFIP 
Residential Substantial Damage Estimator.  Washington, DC:  Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, 1998.

FEMA 312, Homeowner’s Guide to Retrofitting:  Six Ways to Protect 
Your House from Flooding.  Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, 1998.  

FEMA 348, Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage:  Principles 
and Practices for the Design and Construction of Flood Resistant Building 
Utility Systems.  Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency Management 
Agency, 1999.

FEMA 480, NFIP Floodplain Management Requirements:  A Study Guide 
and Desk Reference.  Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency Management 
Agency, 2005.

FEMA 467-1, Floodplain Management Bulletin:  Elevation Certificate.  
Washington, DC:  Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2004.

FEMA 550, Recommended Residential Construction for the Gulf Coast:  
Building on Strong and Safe Foundations.  Washington, DC:  Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, 2006.

FEMA.  Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65).  [Online].  
Available:  www.fema.gov/plan/prevent/fhm/dl_fpc.shtm

FEMA.  Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31).  [Online].  Available:    
www.fema.gov/business/nfip/elvinst.shtm

FEMA.  (various dates)  NFIP Technical Bulletin Series.  Washington, 
DC:  National Flood Insurance Program.  [Online].  Available:  
www.fema.gov/fima/techbul.shtm
FEMA FIA-TB #0:  User’?s Guide to Technical Bulletins.  1999.  
FEMA FIA-TB #1:  Openings in Foundation Walls for Buildings 
Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.  1993.
FEMA FIA-TB #2:  Flood-Resistant Material Requirements for 
Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.  1993.
FEMA FIA-TB #3:  Non-Residential Floodproofing Requirements 
and Certification for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.  
1993.
FEMA FIA-TB #4:  Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in 
Special Flood Hazard Areas.  1993.
FEMA FIA-TB #5:  Free of Obstruction Requirements for Buildings 
Located in Coastal High Hazard Areas.  1993.
FEMA FIA-TB #6:  Below Grade Parking Requirements for Buildings 
Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.  1993.  
FEMA FIA-TB #7:  Wet Floodproofing Requirements for Structures 
Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.  1993.  
FEMA FIA-TB #8:  Corrosion Protection for Metal Connectors in 
Coastal Areas for Structures Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.  
1996.
FEMA FIA-TB #9:  Design and Construction Guidance for Breakaway 
Walls Below Elevated Coastal Buildings.  1999.
FEMA FIA-TB #10:  Ensuring that Structures Built on Fill in or Near 
Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonably Safe From Flooding.  
2001.
FEMA FIA-TB #11:  Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located 
in Special Flood Hazard Areas (NFIP Interim Guidance).  2001.

IBC 2003, International Building Code.  Falls Church, VA:  International 
Code Council, Inc., 2003.

IBC 2006, International Building Code.  Falls Church, VA:  International 
Code Council, Inc., 2006.

Jones, Christopher P., W.L. Coulbourne, J. Marshall, and S.M. Rogers, Jr., 
Evaluation of the National Flood Insurance Program's Building 
Standards. Washington, D.C.:  American Institutes for Research, 2006.

ICC 600, Standard for Residential Construction in High Wind Regions.  
Falls Church, VA:  International Code Council, Inc., 2008 (anticipated 
publication date).

ICC PC 2003, International Code Council Performance Code.  Falls 
Church, VA:  International Code Council, Inc., 2003.

ICC PC 2006, International Code Council Performance Code.  Falls 
Church, VA:  International Code Council, Inc., 2006.

IEBC 2003, International Existing Building Code.  Falls Church, VA:  
International Code Council, Inc., 2003.

IEBC 2006, International Existing Building Code.  Falls Church, VA:  
International Code Council, Inc., 2006.

IFGC 2003, International Fuel Gas Code.  Falls Church, VA:  
International Code Council, Inc., 2003.

IFGC 2006, International Fuel Gas Code.  Falls Church, VA:  
International Code Council, Inc., 2006.

IMC 2003, International Mechanical Code.  Falls Church, VA:  
International Code Council, Inc., 2003.

IMC 2006, International Mechanical Code.  Falls Church, VA:  
International Code Council, Inc., 2006.

IPC 2003, International Plumbing Code.  Falls Church, VA:  International 
Code Council, Inc., 2003.

IPC 2006, International Plumbing Code.  Falls Church, VA:  International 
Code Council, Inc., 2006.

IPSDC 2003, International Private Sewage Disposal Code.  Falls Church, 
VA:  International Code Council, Inc., 2003.

IPSDC 2006, International Private Sewage Disposal Code.  Falls Church, 
VA:  International Code Council, Inc., 2006.

IRC 2003, International Residential Code.  Falls Church, VA:  
International Code Council, Inc., 2003.

IRC 2006, International Residential Code.  Falls Church, VA:  
International Code Council, Inc., 2006.

Supplement to the International Codes.  Falls Church, VA:  International 
Code Council, Inc., 2007.

NES Evaluation Protocol for Determination of Flood-Resistance 
Properties of Building Elements.  National Evaluation Service, Inc., April 
2000.


Appendix B. Crosswalk of the NFIP Regulations to the Flood Resistance 
Provisions of the IBC
Crosswalk of the NFIP Regulations to the Flood Resistance Provisions of the 
IBC®.


Sec. 59.1  Definitions


NFIP Regulations
BASE FLOOD.  Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being 
equaled or exceeded in any given year.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded 
in any given 
year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.  The elevation of the base flood, including wave 
height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North 
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood 
insurance rate map (FIRM).

NFIP Regulations
BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground 
level) on all sides.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
BASEMENT.  The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground 
level) on all sides.

NFIP Regulations
[Not defined in the NFIP regulations.]

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
DESIGN FLOOD.  The flood associated with the greater of the following two 
areas:
1.	Area with a floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of 
flooding in any year, or 
2.	Area designated as a flood hazard area on a community’s flood hazard 
map, or otherwise legally designated.  

NFIP Regulations
[Not defined in the NFIP regulations.]

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION.  The elevation of the “design flood,” including wave 
height, relative to the datum specified on the community’s legally designated 
flood hazard map.  In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation 
shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building’s 
perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map.  
In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the 
map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to 2 feet (610mm).  

NFIP Regulations
DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, 
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, 
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or 
storage of equipment or materials.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
101.2  Scope
105.1  [Permits] Required
105.2  Work exempt from permit
Appendix G.  DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real 
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, temporary 
structures, temporary or permanent storage of materials, mining, dredging, 
filling, grading, paving, excavations, operations 
and other land disturbing activities.

NFIP Regulations
See FLOODPROOFING.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
DRY FLOODPROOFING.  A combination of design modifications that result in a 
building or structure, including the attendant utility and sanitary 
facilities, being watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the 
passage of water and with structural components having the capacity to resist 
loads as identified in ASCE 7.

NFIP Regulations
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION (EXISTING STRUCTURES).  
For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of 
construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before 
January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.  “Existing 
construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  Any buildings and structures for which the “start of 
construction” commenced before the effective date of the community’s first 
floodplain management code, ordinance or standard.  “Existing construction” 
may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
EXISTING STRUCTURES.  See “Existing construction.”

NFIP Regulations
FLOOD or FLOODING.
(a)	A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of 
normally dry land areas from.  
	(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.  
	(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from 
any source.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete 
inundation of normally dry land from:
1.	The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2.	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any 
source.

NFIP Regulations
[Not defined in the NFIP regulations.]

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
FLOOD DAMAGE RESISTANT MATERIALS.  Any construction material capable of 
withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining 
any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair.

NFIP Regulations
[Not defined in the NFIP regulations.]

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  The greater of the following two areas:
1.	The area within a floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance 
of flooding in any year.  
2.	The area designated as a flood hazard area on a community’s flood 
hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA SUBJECT TO HIGH VELOCITY WAVE ACTION.  Area within the 
flood hazard area which is subject to high velocity wave action, and shown on 
a Flood Insurance Rate Map or other flood hazard map as Zone V, VO, or V1-30.

NFIP Regulations
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on which 
the Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk 
premium zones applicable to the community.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community on which the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood 
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

NFIP Regulations
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (see FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY).  An examination, 
evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, 
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and 
determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion 
hazards.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.  The official report provided by the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency containing the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary 
and Floodway Map (FBFM), the water surface elevation of the base flood and 
supporting technical data.

NFIP Regulations
FLOODWAY – See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
FLOODWAY.  The channel of the river, creek, or other watercourse and the 
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base 
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a 
designated height.
NFIP Regulations
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE.  A use which cannot 
perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried 
out in close proximity to water.  The term includes only 
docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the 
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship 
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include 
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G.  FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.  A facility which cannot be 
used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close 
proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the 
loading or unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair.  
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service 
facilities.

NFIP Regulations
HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
(a)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic 
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily 
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for 
individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of 
the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered 
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to 
qualify as a registered historic district; 
 (c)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states 
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary 
of the Interior; or 
(d)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in 
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified 
either.  
	(1) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the 
Interior or 
	(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without 
approved programs.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
HISTORIC BUILDINGS.  Buildings that are listed in or eligible for listing in 
the National Register of Historic Places, or designated as historic under an 
appropriate state or local law (see Section 3407).
§3407.2 Flood hazard areas.  Within flood hazard areas established in Sec. 
1612.3, where the work proposed constitutes substantial improvement as 
defined in Sec. 1612.2, the building shall be brought into conformance with 
Sec. 1612.2.  
Exception:  Historic buildings that are:
1.	Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for listing in the 
National Register of Historic Places; or
2.	Determined by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Interior as 
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district 
or a district preliminarily determined to qualify as an historic district; or
3.	Designated as historic under a state or local historic preservation 
program that is approved by the Department of Interior.  

NFIP Regulations
LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed 
area (including basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant 
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building 
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is 
not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such 
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in 
violation of the applicable non-elevation design 
requirements of Sec. 60.3. 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
LOWEST FLOOR.  The floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, but 
excluding any unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for 
vehicle parking, building access, or limited storage provided that such 
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of this 
section.

NFIP Regulations
MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one 
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and 
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation 
when attached to the required utilities.  The term 
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G.  MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure that is transportable in one or 
more sections, built on a permanent chassis, designed for use with or without 
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities, and 
constructed to the Federal Mobile Home Construction and 
Safety Standards and rules and regulations promulgated by the U.S.  
Department of Housing and Urban Development.  The term also includes mobile 
homes, park trailers, travel trailers, and similar 
transportable structures that are placed on a site for 180 consecutive days 
or longer.

NFIP Regulations
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel 
(or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more 
manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G.  MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous 
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or 
sale.

NFIP Regulations
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is.  
(a)	built on a single chassis; 
(b)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal 
projection; 
(c)	designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light  duty 
truck; and 
(d)	designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling 
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or 
seasonal use.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G.  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is built on a single 
chassis, 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal 
projection, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light 
duty truck, and designed primarily not for use as a permanent 
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, 
or seasonal use.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on 
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the 
site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no 
permanently attached additions.

NFIP Regulations
REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or 
other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be 
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without 
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more 
than a designated height.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
See FLOODWAY.

NFIP Regulations
REMEDY A VIOLATION.  to bring the structure or other 
development into compliance with State or local flood plain 
management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to 
reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.  Ways that 
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or 
other affected development from flood damages, 
implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance 
or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing 
Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or 
other development.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
113  Violations
Appendix G101.4  VIOLATIONS.  Any violation of a provision of this appendix, 
or failure to comply with a permit or variance issued pursuant to this 
appendix or any requirement of this appendix, shall be handled in accordance 
with Section 113.

NFIP Regulations
SPECIAL HAZARD AREA.  Area of special flood hazard is the land in the flood 
plain within a  community subject to a one percent or greater chance of 
flooding in any  given year.  The area may be designated as Zone A on the 
FHBM.  After  detailed ratemaking has been completed in 
preparation for publication of  the flood insurance rate map, Zone A usually 
is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, 
AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or  V1-30, VE, or V.  For purposes of these regulations, the 
term “special  flood hazard area (SFHA)” is synonymous in meaning with the 
phrase “area of special flood hazard.”  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  The land area subject to flood hazards and shown 
on a Flood Insurance Rate Map or other flood hazard map as Zone A, AE, A1-30, 
A99, AR, AO, AH, V, VO, VE, or V1-30.

NFIP Regulations
START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Construction (for other than 
new construction or substantial improvements under the 
Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes 
substantial improvement, and means the date the building 
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, 
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or 
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  
The actual start means either the first placement of 
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the 
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the 
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of 
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a 
foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land 
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does 
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor 
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, 
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does 
it include the installation on the property of accessory units 
or not part of the main structure.  For a substantial 
improvement,  the actual start of construction means the first 
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of 
a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external 
dimensions of the building.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
START OF CONSTRUCTION.  The date of permit issuance for new construction and 
substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of 
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or 
other improvement is within 180 days after the date of issuance.  The actual 
start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of 
a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of 
a slab or footings, installation of pilings or construction of columns.  
Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, 
excavation, grading, or filling), or the installation of streets or walkways, 
or excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection 
of temporary forms, or the installation of accessory buildings such as 
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main 
building.  For a substantial improvement, the actual “start of construction” 
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural 
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external 
dimensions of the 
building.

NFIP Regulations
STRUCTURE.  For flood plain management purposes, a 
walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid 
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a 
manufactured home.  “Structure” for insurance coverage 
purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a 
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground 
and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured 
home on a permanent foundation.  For the latter purpose, 
the term includes a building while in the course of 
construction, alteration or repair, but does not include 
building materials or supplies intended for use in such 
construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or 
supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
101.2  Scope
105.2  Work exempt from a permit

NFIP Regulations
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained 
by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to 
its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 
percent of the market value of the structure before the 
damage occurred.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby 
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would 
equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the 
damage occurred.

NFIP Regulations
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or 
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 
percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of 
construction” of the improvement.  This term includes structures which have 
incurred “substantial damage”, regardless of the actual repair work 
performed.  The term does not, however, include either.  
(1)	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct 
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or 
safety code specifications which have been identified 
by the local code enforcement official and which are 
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or 
(2)	Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that the 
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued 
designation as a “historic structure.”

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, 
addition, or improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals 
or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the 
improvement or repair is started.  If the structure has sustained substantial 
damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the 
actual repair work performed.  The term does not, however, include either:
(1)	Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing 
health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building 
official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
(2)	Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration 
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic 
structure.

NFIP Regulations
VARIANCE.  A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a flood plain 
management regulation.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
104.10  Modifications
104.11  Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and 
equipment.  [In flood hazard areas, modifications require a formal variance.]
Appendix G.  VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this 
section which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this 
section where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.

NFIP Regulations
VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development 
to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain 
management regulations.  A structure or other development 
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other 
evidence of compliance required in Sec. 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), 
(c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in 
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
113 Violations
Appendix G.  VIOLATION.  A development that is not fully compliant with this 
appendix or Section 1612 , as applicable.


59.22  [This section outlines actions to be taken by communities to be 
eligible for the National Flood Insurance Program, including application 
procedures, documentation requirements, and a commitment to fulfill certain 
functions and responsibilities.] 

1
NFIP Regulations
(a)(9)(iii)  Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request 
certificates of elevation and certificates of floodproofing.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
104.7  Department Records
Appendix G103.8 Records.  The building official shall maintain a permanent 
record of all permits issued in flood hazard areas, including copies of 
inspection reports and certifications required in Section 1612.
2
NFIP Regulations
(b)(1)  Appoint the agency or official with the responsibility, authority, 
and means to implement the commitments, including certain 
reporting requirements.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
103  Department of Building Safety
104  Duties and Powers of the Building Official
Appendix G104.3  Validity of permit.  The issuance of a permit under this 
appendix shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any 
violation of this appendix or any other ordinance of the jurisdiction.  The 
issuance of a permit based on submitted documents and information shall not 
prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors.  The 
building official is authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure or 
site which is in violation of this appendix or other ordinances of this 
jurisdiction.
Appendix G104.4  Expiration.  A permit shall become invalid if the proposed 
development is not commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the 
work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the 
work commences.  Extensions shall be requested in writing and justifiable 
cause demonstrated.  The building official is authorized to grant, in 
writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days 
each.  
Appendix G104.5  Suspension or revocation.  The building official is 
authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under this appendix wherever 
the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or 
incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or code of this 
jurisdiction.


Sec. 60.2  Minimum compliance with flood plain management criteria.  
[Sections (a) through (c) pertain to meeting specific criteria set forth 
herein, as a function of the type of flood-related hazard and the level of 
detail provided on the flood hazard map prepared by FEMA.  Section (e) 
provides for coordination with State Coordinating Agencies with respect to 
submission of regulations for participation in the NFIP; Section (f) 
addresses the community function to submit reports periodically, when 
requested; and Section (g) directs communities to assure that their 
comprehensive plans are consistent with floodplain management objectives.]

3
NFIP Regulations
 (h)	The community shall adopt and enforce 
floodplain management regulations based on 
data provided by the Administrator.  Without 
prior approval of the Administrator, the 
community shall not adopt and enforce 
floodplain management regulations based upon 
modified data reflecting natural or man-made 
changes.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1612.3  Establishment of flood hazard areas.  To establish flood hazard 
areas, the applicable governing authority shall adopt a flood hazard map and 
supporting data.  The flood hazard map shall include, at a minimum, areas of 
special flood hazard as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
in an engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for [INSERT NAME 
OF JURISDICTION],” dated [INSERT DATE OF ISSUANCE], as amended or revised 
with the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Boundary and 
Floodway Map (FBFM) and related supporting data along with any revisions 
thereto.  The adopted flood hazard map and supporting data are hereby adopted 
by reference and declared to be part of this section.
1612.3.1  Design flood elevations.  Where design flood elevations are not 
included in the flood hazard areas established in Section 1612.3, or if 
floodways are not designated, the building official is authorized to require 
the applicant to: 
1.	Obtain and reasonably utilize any design flood elevation and floodway 
data available from a federal, state, or other source, or 
2.	Determine the design flood elevation and/or floodway in accordance with 
accepted hydrologic and hydraulic engineering practices used to define 
special flood hazard areas.  Determinations shall be undertaken by a 
registered design professional who shall document that the technical methods 
used reflect currently accepted engineering practice.
Appendix G102.2  Establishment of flood hazard areas.  Flood hazard areas are 
established in Section 1612.3 of the International Building Code, adopted by 
the applicable governing authority on __________.


Sec. 60.3  Floodplain management criteria for flood-prone areas.  
(a)	When the Administrator has not defined the special flood hazard areas 
within a community, has not provided water surface elevation data, and has 
not provided sufficient data to identify the floodway or coastal high hazard 
area, but the community has indicated the presence of such hazards by 
submitting an application to participate in the Program, the community shall:

4
NFIP Regulations
(1)	Require permits for all proposed construction or other development, 
including the placement of manufactured homes, to determine whether such 
development is proposed within flood hazard areas;

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
101.2  Scope
105.2  Work exempt from permit
105.2.2  Repairs
1612.1  General (Flood Loads).  Within flood hazard areas as established in 
Section 1612.3, all new construction of buildings, structures and portions of 
buildings and structures, including substantial improvements and restoration 
of substantial damage to buildings and structures, shall be designed and 
constructed to resist the effects of flood hazards and flood loads.  For 
buildings that are located in one or more flood hazard area, the provisions 
associated with the most restrictive flood hazard area shall apply.
3403.1  Existing buildings or structures.  Additions or alterations to any 
building or structure shall conform with the requirements of the code for new 
construction.  Additions or alterations shall not be made to an existing 
building or structure which will cause the existing building or structure to 
be in violation of any provisions of this code.  An existing building plus 
additions shall comply with the height and area provisions of Chapter 5.  
Portions of the structure not altered and not affected by the alteration are 
not required to comply with the code requirements for a new structure.
3403.1.1 Flood hazard areas.  For buildings and structures in flood hazard 
areas established in Section 1612.3, any additions, alterations or repairs 
that constitutes substantial improvement of the existing structure, as 
defined in Section 1612.2, shall comply with the flood design requirements 
for new construction and all aspects of the existing structure shall be 
brought into compliance with the requirements for new construction for flood 
design.
Appendix G101.1  Purpose.  The purpose of this appendix is to promote the 
public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private 
losses due to flood conditions in specific flood hazard areas through the 
establishment of comprehensive regulations for management of flood hazard 
areas, designed to:
1.	Prevent unnecessary disruption of commerce, access, and public service 
during times of flooding;
2.	Manage the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and 
shorelines;
3.	Manage filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may 
increase flood damage or erosion potential;
4.	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will 
divert flood waters or which can increase flood hazards; and
5.	Contribute to improved construction techniques in the floodplain.
Appendix G102.1  General (Applicability).  This appendix, in conjunction with 
the International Building Code, provides minimum requirements for 
development located in flood hazard areas, including the subdivision of land; 
installation of utilities; placement and replacement of manufactured homes; 
new construction and repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or additions to 
new construction; substantial improvement of existing buildings and 
structures, including restoration after damage, and certain building work 
exempt from permit under §105.2.
Appendix G103.1  Permit applications.  The building official shall review all 
permit applications to determine whether proposed development sites will be 
reasonably safe from flooding.  If a proposed development site is in a flood 
hazard area, all site development activities, including grading, filling, 
utility installation, and drainage modification, and all new construction and 
substantial improvement of existing buildings and structures, including 
restoration after damage; temporary structures and temporary or permanent 
storage; utility and miscellaneous Group U buildings and structures;  and 
certain building work exempt from permit under §105.2, shall be designed and 
constructed with methods, practices, and materials that minimize flood damage 
and that are in accordance with this code and the ASCE 24.
Appendix G104.1  [Permits] Required.  Any person, owner or authorized agent 
who intends to conduct any development in a flood hazard area shall first 
make application to the building official and shall obtain the required 
permit
G801 Other Building Work
G801.1  Detached accessory structures.  Detached accessory structures shall 
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from 
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of 
the design flood. Fully enclosed accessory structures shall have flood 
openings to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.  
G801.2  Fences.  Fences in floodways that may block the passage of 
floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the 
requirement of BG103.5. 
G801.3  Oil derricks.  Oil derricks located in flood hazard areas shall be 
designed in conformance with the flood loads in Section 1603.1.6 and Section 
1612.  
G801.4  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways.  Retaining walls, sidewalks 
and driveways shall meet the requirements of Section 1803.4.  
G801.5  Prefabricated Swimming pools.  Prefabricated swimming pools in 
floodways shall meet the requirement of BG103.5.  
G901 Temporary Structures and Temporary Storage  
G901.1 Temporary structures.  Temporary structures shall be erected for a 
period of less than 180 days.  
Temporary structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or 
lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of 
buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. Fully enclosed temporary 
structures shall have flood openings to allow for the automatic entry and 
exit of flood waters.  
G901.2  Temporary storage.  Temporary storage includes storage of goods and 
materials for a period of less than 180 days.  Stored materials shall not 
include hazardous materials.  
G901.3  Temporary structures and storage.  Temporary structures and temporary 
storage in floodways shall meet the requirements of G103.5.
G1001 Utility and Miscellaneous Group U
G1001.1 Utility and Miscellaneous Group U.  Utility and Miscellaneous Group U 
includes buildings that are accessory in character and miscellaneous 
structures not classified in any specific occupancy in the International 
Building Code, including, but not limited to, agricultural buildings, 
aircraft hangars (accessory to a one- or two-family residence), barns, 
carports, fences more than 6 feet (1829 mm) high, grain silos (accessory to a 
residential occupancy), greenhouses, livestock shelters, private garages, 
retaining walls, sheds, stables, and towers.
G1001.1  Flood loads.  Utility and miscellaneous Group U buildings and 
structures, including substantial improvement of such buildings and 
structures, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral 
movement resulting from flood loads, including the effects of buoyancy, 
during conditions of the design flood.  
G1001.2 Elevation.  Utility and miscellaneous Group U buildings and 
structures, including substantial improvement of such buildings and 
structures, shall be elevated such that the lowest floor, including basement, 
is elevated to or above the design flood elevation in accordance with Section 
1612 of the International Building Code.
G1001.4 Enclosures below design flood elevation.  Fully enclosed areas below 
the design flood elevation shall be at or above grade on all sides and 
conform to the following:
1.  In flood hazard areas not subject to high velocity wave action, shall 
have flood openings to allow for the automatic inflow and outflow of 
floodwaters.
2. In flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action, shall have 
walls below the design flood elevation that are designed to break away or 
collapse from a water load less than that which would occur during the design 
flood, without causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage to 
the building or structure.
G1001.5  Flood-damage resistant materials.  Flood-damage resistant materials 
shall be used below the design flood elevation.
G1-01.6  Protection of mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems.  
Mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems, including plumbing fixtures, 
shall be elevated to or above the design flood elevation. 
Exception:  Electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating, 
ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, 
duct systems, and other service equipment are permitted to be located below 
the design flood elevation provided that they are designed and installed to 
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to 
resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects 
of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation 
in compliance with the flood-resistant construction requirements of the 
International Building Code.  
Electrical wiring systems are permitted to be located below the design flood 
elevation provided they conform to the provisions of the electrical part of 
the International Code Council Electrical Code Administrative Provisions [for 
wet locations].

5
NFIP Regulations
(2)	Review proposed development to assure 
that all necessary permits have been received 
from other governmental agencies from which 
approval is required by Federal or State law, 
including section 404 of the Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 
U.S.C. 1334; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
105.3.1  Action on application
Appendix G103.2  Other permits.  It shall be the responsibility of the 
building official to assure that approval of a proposed development shall not 
be given until proof that necessary permits have been granted by federal or 
state agencies having jurisdiction over such development.

6
NFIP Regulations
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine 
whether proposed building sites will be 
reasonably safe from flooding.  If a proposed 
building site is in a flood-prone area, all new 
construction and substantial improvements 
shall:
(i)	be designed (or modified) and adequately 
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or 
lateral movement of the structure resulting 
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, 
including the effects of buoyancy, 
(ii)	be constructed with materials resistant to 
flood damage, 
(iii)	be constructed by methods and practices 
that minimize flood damages, and 
(iv)	be constructed with electrical, heating, 
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning 
equipment and other service facilities that 
are designed and/or located so as to 
prevent water from entering or accumulating 
within the components during conditions 
of flooding.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
106.2.5 Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application 
for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and 
location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances 
from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished 
grades, and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood 
elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary 
line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction 
to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and 
construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is 
authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the 
application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise 
warranted.  
R106.2.5.1  Design flood elevation. Where design flood elevations are not 
specified, they shall be established in accordance with Section 1612.3.1.
801.1.3  Applicability.  For buildings in flood hazard areas as established 
in Section 1612.3, interior finishes, trim, and decorative materials that 
extend below the design flood elevation shall be flood-damage-resistant 
materials.  
1403.6  Flood resistance.  For buildings in flood hazard areas as established 
in Section 1612.3, exterior walls extending below the design flood elevation 
shall be resistant to water damage.   Wood shall be pressure preservative 
treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for the species, product and end use using 
a preservative listed in Section 4 in APWA standards or decay-resistant 
heartwood of redwood, black locust, or cedar.
1603.1.6  Flood design data.  For buildings located in whole or in part in 
flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, the following 
documentation pertaining to design, if required in Section 1612.5, shall be 
shown, regardless of whether flood loads govern the design of the building:
(1)	In flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity wave action, the 
elevation of proposed lowest floor, including basement.
(2)	In flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity wave action, the 
elevation to which any nonresidential building will be dry floodproofed.
(3)	In flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action, the 
proposed elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member 
of the lowest floor, including basement.

1605.2  Load combinations using strength design or load and resistance factor 
design.
1605.2.2  Other loads.   Where Fa is to be considered in design, the load 
combinations of Section 
2.3.3 of ASCE 7 shall be used.  [Note:  Fa = flood loads.]
1605.3  Load combinations using allowable stress design.
1605.3.1.2  Other loads.  Where Fa is to be considered in design, the load 
combinations of Section 2.4.2 of ASCE 7 shall be used. [Note:  Fa = flood 
loads.]
1612.4  Design and construction.  The design and construction of buildings 
and structures located in flood hazard areas, including flood hazard areas 
subject to high velocity wave action, shall be in accordance with ASCE 24.
1801.1  Scope (Soils and Foundations).  The provisions of this chapter shall 
apply to building and foundation systems in those areas not subject to scour 
or water pressure by wind and wave action.  
Buildings and foundations subject to such scour or water pressure loads shall 
be designed in accordance with Chapter 16.
1803.4  Grading and fill in flood hazard areas.  In flood hazard areas 
established in Section 1612.3, grading and/or fill shall not be approved:  
1.  Unless fill is placed, compacted, and sloped to minimize shifting, 
slumping and erosion during the rise and fall of floodwater and, as 
applicable, wave action. 
2.  In floodways, unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and 
hydraulic analyses performed by a registered design professional in 
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed grading or 
fill, or both, will not result in any increase in flood levels during the 
occurrence of the design flood.
3.  In flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action, unless such 
fill is conducted and/or placed to avoid diversion of water and waves toward 
any building or structure.  
4.  Where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been 
designated, unless it has been demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the 
proposed flood hazard area encroachment, when combined with all other 
existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachment, will not increase 
the design flood elevation more than one foot at any point. 3001.2  
Referenced standards.  Except as otherwise provided for in this code, the 
design, construction, installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of 
elevators and conveying systems and their components shall conform to ASME 
A17.1, ASME A90.1, ASME B20.1, ALI ALCTV, and ASCE 
24 for construction in flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3.
3102.7  Engineering design.  The structure shall be designed and constructed 
to sustain dead loads, loads due to tension or inflation, live loads 
including wind, snow, flood, and seismic loads and in accordance with Chapter 
16.
3403.1.1 [Existing buildings or structures] Flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 4
[For electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning 
equipment and other service facilities, see Appendix D for texts from IMC, 
IPC, IFGC and IPSDC.]
Appendix G101.1  Purpose (Flood Resistant Construction).  SEE BLOCK 4
Appendix G101.2  Objectives.  The objectives of this appendix are to protect 
human life, minimize the expenditure of public money for flood control 
projects, minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with 
flooding, minimize prolonged business interruption, minimize damage to public 
facilities and utilities, help maintain a stable tax base by providing for 
the sound use and development of flood-prone areas, contribute to improved 
construction techniques in the floodplain, and ensure that potential owners 
and occupants are notified that property is within flood hazard areas.
Appendix G101.3  Scope.  The provisions of this appendix shall apply to all 
proposed development in a flood hazard area established in Section 1612 of 
this co de, including certain work exempt from permit under §105.2.
Appendix G104.2  Application for permit.  The applicant shall file an 
application in writing on a form furnished by the building official.  Such 
application shall:
1.	Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit.
2.	Describe the land on which the proposed development is to conducted by 
legal description, street address or similar description that will readily 
identify and definitely locate the site.
3.	Include a site plan showing the delineation of flood hazard areas, 
floodway boundaries, flood zones, design flood elevations, ground elevations, 
proposed fill and excavation, and drainage patterns and facilities.
4.	Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is 
intended.
5.	Be accompanied by construction documents, grading and filling plans, 
and other information deemed appropriate by the building official.
6.	State the valuation of the proposed work.
7.	Be signed by the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent.
Appendix G401.5  Storm drainage.  Storm drainage shall be designed to convey 
the flow of surface waters so as to minimize or eliminate damage to persons 
or property.
Appendix G401.6  Streets and sidewalks.  Streets and sidewalks shall be 
designed to minimize potential for increasing or aggravating flood levels.
Appendix G701.1  Underground tanks.  Underground tanks in flood hazard areas 
shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement 
resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during 
conditions of the design flood.  
Appendix G701.2  Above-ground tanks.  Above-ground tanks in flood hazard 
areas shall be elevated to or above the design flood elevation or shall be 
anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, 
collapse, or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic 
loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design 
flood.  
Appendix G701.3  Tank inlets and vents.  In flood hazard areas, tank inlets, 
fill openings, outlets and vents shall be:
1.	At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed 
to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks 
during conditions of the design flood.
2.	Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and 
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of 
the design flood.  
Appendix G801.1  Detached accessory structures.  Detached accessory 
structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral 
movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, 
during conditions of the design flood. Fully enclosed accessory structures 
shall have flood openings to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood 
waters.  
Appendix G801.2  Fences.  Fences in floodways that may block the passage of 
floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the 
requirement of BG103.5.  
Appendix G801.3  Oil derricks.  Oil derricks located in flood hazard areas 
shall be designed in conformance with the flood loads in Section 1603.1.6 and 
Section 1612.  
Appendix G801.4  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways.  Retaining walls, 
sidewalks and driveways shall meet the requirements of Section 1803.4. 
Appendix G801.5  Prefabricated Swimming pools.  Prefabricated swimming pools 
in floodways shall meet the requirement of BG103.5.  

7
NFIP Regulations 
(4)	Review subdivision proposals and other 
proposed new development, including 
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to 
determine whether such proposals will be 
reasonably safe from flooding.  If a subdivision 
proposal or other proposed new development 
is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals 
shall be reviewed to assure that:
(i)	all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood 
damage within the flood- prone area, 
(ii)	all public utilities and facilities, such as 
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to 
minimize or eliminate flood damage, and (iii)	adequate drainage is provided 
to reduce exposure to flood hazards;

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G301.1  General (Subdivisions).  Any subdivision proposal, including 
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, or other proposed new 
development in a flood hazard area shall be reviewed to assure that:
1.	All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood 
damage, and
2.	All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electric, and 
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood 
damage, and
3.	Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Appendix G301.2  Subdivision requirements.  The following requirements shall 
apply in the case of any proposed subdivision, including proposals for 
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, any portion of which lies within a 
flood hazard area:
1.	The flood hazard area, including floodways and areas subject to high 
velocity wave action, as appropriate, shall be delineated on tentative and 
final subdivision plats;
2.	Design flood elevations shall be shown on tentative and final 
subdivision plats;
3.	Residential building lots shall be provided with adequate buildable 
area outside the floodway; and
4.	The design criteria for utilities and facilities set forth in this 
appendix and appropriate International Codes shall be met.
Appendix G401.5  Storm drainage.  SEE BLOCK 6

8
NFIP Regulations
 (5)	Require within flood-prone areas new and 
replacement water supply systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate 
infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G401.4  Water facilities.  All new or replacement water facilities 
shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 7, ASCE 24 to 
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.

9
NFIP Regulations 
(6) Require within flood-prone areas 
(i)	new and replacement sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize 
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the 
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and 
(ii)	onsite waste disposal systems to be located to avoid impairment to them 
or contamination from them during flooding.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G401.3  Sewer facilities.  All new or replaced sanitary sewer 
facilities, private sewer treatment plants (including all pumping stations 
and collector systems) and onsite waste disposal systems, shall be designed 
in accordance with Chapter 7, ASCE 24 to minimize or eliminate infiltration 
of flood waters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into 
flood waters, or impairment of the facilities and systems. [See Appendix D 
for texts from IPSDC.]


(b) When the Administrator has designated areas of special flood hazards (A 
zones) by the publication of a community's FHBM or FIRM, but has neither 
produced water surface elevation data nor identified a floodway or coastal 
high hazard area, the community shall:  

10
NFIP Regulations
 (1)	Require permits for all proposed 
construction and other developments including 
the placement of manufactured homes, within 
Zone A on the community's FHBM or FIRM; 
(2)	Require the application of the standards in 
paragraphs (a) (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this 
section to development within Zone A on the 
community's FHBM or FIRM; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Prior provisions cumulative]

11
NFIP Regulations
(3)  Require that all new subdivision proposals 
and other proposed developments (including 
proposals for manufactured home parks and 
subdivisions)greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, 
whichever is the lesser, include within such 
proposals base flood elevation data; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G103.3  Determination of design flood elevations.  If design flood 
elevations are not specified, the building official is authorized to require 
the applicant to:
1.	Obtain, review and reasonably utilize data available from a federal, 
state or other source, or 
2.	Determine the design flood elevation in accordance with accepted 
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.  Such analyses shall be 
performed and sealed by a registered design professional.  Studies, analyses, 
and computations shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow thorough 
review and approval by the building official.  The accuracy of data submitted 
for such determination shall be the responsibility of the applicant.

12
NFIP Regulations
(4)	Obtain, review and reasonably utilize any 
base flood elevation and floodway data available 
from a Federal, State, or other source, including 
data developed pursuant to paragraph (b)(3) of 
this section, as criteria for requiring that new 
construction, substantial improvements, or other 
development in Zone A on the community's 
FHBM or FIRM meet the standards in 
paragraphs (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(5), (c)(6), (c)(12), 
(c)(14), (d)(2) and (d)(3) of this section; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1612.3  Establishment of flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 3
Appendix G103.3  Determination of design flood elevations.  SEE BLOCK 11

13
NFIP Regulations
 (5)	Where base flood elevation data are utilized, within Zone A on the 
community's FHBM or FIRM.  
(i)	Obtain the elevation (in relation to mean 
sea level) of the lowest floor (including 
basement) of all new and substantially 
improved structures, and 
(ii)	Obtain, if the structure has been 
floodproofed in accordance with paragraph 
(c)(3)(ii) of this section, the elevation (in 
relation to mean sea level) to which the 
structure was floodproofed, and (iii) 
Maintain a record of all such information 
with the official designated by the 
community under Sec.  59.22 (a)(9)(iii); 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
104.7  Department records
109.3.3  Lowest floor elevation.  In flood hazard areas, upon placement of 
the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical 
construction, the elevation documentation required in Section 1612.5 shall be 
submitted to the code official.  
1612.5  Flood hazard documentation.  The following documentation shall be 
prepared and sealed by a registered design professional and shall be 
submitted to the building official.  
1.	For construction in flood hazard areas not subject to high velocity 
wave action:
	1.1  The elevation of the lowest floor elevation, including basement, 
as required by the lowest floor elevation inspection in Section 109.3.3.
	1.2  For fully enclosed areas below the design flood elevation where 
provisions to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters do not 
meet the minimum requirements in Section 2.6.2.1, ASCE 24, construction 
documents shall include a statement that the design will provide for 
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces in accordance with Section 2.6.2.2, 
ASCE 24.  
1.3  For dry floodproofed nonresidential buildings, construction documents 
shall include a statement that the dry flood proofing is designed in 
accordance with ASCE 24. 

14
NFIP Regulation
 (6)	Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent 
communities and the State Coordinating Office 
prior to any alteration or relocation of a 
watercourse, and submit copies of such 
notifications to the Administrator; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G103.6  Watercourse alteration.  Prior to issuing a permit for any 
alteration or relocation of any watercourse, the building official shall 
require the applicant to provide notification of the proposal to the 
appropriate authorities of all affected adjacent government jurisdictions, as 
well as appropriate state agencies.  A copy of the notification shall be 
maintained in the permit records and submitted to FEMA.

15
NFIP Regulation
(7)	Assure that the flood carrying capacity 
within the altered or relocated portion of any 
watercourse is maintained; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G103.6.1  Engineering analysis.  The building official shall require 
submission of an engineering analysis which demonstrates that the flood 
carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the  watercourse 
will not be decreased.  Such watercourses shall be maintained in a manner 
which preserves the channel’s flood carrying capacity.

16
NFIP Regulations
 (8)	Require that all manufactured homes to be 
placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or 
FIRM shall be installed using methods and 
practices which minimize flood damage.  For the 
purposes of this requirement, manufactured 
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist 
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.  
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not 
to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties 
to ground anchors.  This requirement is in 
addition to applicable State and local anchoring 
requirements for resisting wind forces.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G501.1  Elevation (Manufactured Homes).  All new and replacement 
manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved in a flood hazard 
area shall be elevated such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is 
elevated to or above the design flood elevation.
Appendix G501.2  Foundations.  All new and replacement manufactured homes, 
including substantial improvement of existing manufactured homes, shall be 
placed on a permanent, reinforced foundation that is designed in accordance 
with Section 1612 of the building code.
Appendix G501.3  Anchoring.  All new and replacement manufactured homes to be 
placed or substantially improved in a flood hazard area shall be installed 
using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.  Manufactured homes 
shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to 
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring are 
authorized to include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or 
frame ties to ground anchors.  This requirement is in addition to applicable 
State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.


(c) When the Administrator has provided a notice of final flood elevations 
for one or more special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM and, if 
appropriate, has designated other special flood hazard areas without base 
flood elevations on the community's FIRM, but has not identified a regulatory 
floodway or coastal high hazard area, the community shall.  

17
NFIP Regulations
 (1)	Require the standards of paragraph (b) of 
this section within all A1-30 zones, AE zones, A 
zones, AH zones, and AO zones, on the 
community's FIRM; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Prior provisions cumulative]

18
NFIP Regulations
(2)	Require that all new construction and 
substantial improvements of residential 
structures within Zones A1-30, AE and AH zones 
on the community's FIRM have the lowest floor 
(including basement) elevated to or above the 
base flood level, unless the community is 
granted an exception by the Administrator for 
the allowance of basements in accordance with 
Sec. 60.6 (b) or (c); 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1603.1.6  Flood design data.  SEE BLOCK 6
1612.1  General (Flood Loads).  SEE BLOCK 4
1612.3  General (Flood Loads).  SEE BLOCK 3
1612.4  Design and construction.  SEE BLOCK 6
1807.1.2.1  Flood hazard areas.  For buildings and structures in flood hazard 
areas as established in Section 1612.3, the finished ground level of an 
underfloor space such as a crawl space shall be equal to or higher than the 
outside finished ground level.
Exception:  Underfloor spaces of Group R-3 buildings that meet the 
requirements of FEMA/FIA TB 11-1.
3403.1.1  Flood hazard areas (Existing buildings or structures).  SEE BLOCK 4

19
NFIP Regulations
(3)	Require that all new construction and 
substantial improvements of non-residential 
structures within Zones A1-30, AE and AH zones 
on the community's FIRM:
(i)	have the lowest floor (including basement) 
elevated to or above the base flood level or, 
(ii)	together with attendant utility and sanitary 
facilities, be designed so that below the 
base flood level the structure is watertight 
with walls substantially impermeable to the 
passage of water and with structural 
components having the capability of 
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic 
loads and effects of buoyancy; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1603.1.6  Flood design data.  SEE BLOCK 6
1612.1  General (Flood Loads).  SEE BLOCK 4
1612.4  Design and construction.  SEE BLOCK 6
3403.1.1  Flood hazard areas (Existing buildings or structures).  SEE BLOCK 4

20
NFIP Regulations
(4)	Provide that where a non-residential 
structure is intended to be made watertight below 
the base flood level, 
(i)	a registered professional engineer or 
architect shall develop and/or review 
structural design, specifications, and plans 
for the construction, and shall certify that 
the design and methods of construction are 
in accordance with accepted standards of 
practice for meeting the applicable 
provisions of paragraph (c)(3)(ii) or 
(c)(8)(ii) of this section, and 
(ii)	a record of such certificates which includes 
the specific elevation (in relation to mean 
sea level) to which such structures are 
floodproofed shall be maintained with the 
official designated by the community under 
Sec.  59.22(a)(9)(iii); 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
104.7  Department records.
1612.5.1  Flood hazard documentation.  [Flood hazard areas not subject to 
high velocity wave action]  SEE BLOCK 13
Appendix G103.8  Records.  SEE BLOCK 1

21
NFIP Regulations
 (5)	Require, for all new construction and 
substantial improvements, that fully enclosed 
areas below the lowest floor that are usable 
solely for parking of vehicles, building access 
or storage in an area other than a basement and 
which are subject to flooding shall be designed 
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood 
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry 
and exit of floodwaters.  Designs for meeting 
this requirement must either be certified by a 
registered professional engineer or architect or 
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria.  
A minimum of two openings having a total net 
area of not less than one square inch for every 
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding 
shall be provided.  The bottom of all openings 
shall be no higher than one foot above grade.  
Openings may be equipped with screens, 
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices 
provided that they permit the automatic entry 
and exit of floodwaters.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1202.3.2  [Under-floor ventilation]  Exceptions
5.      For buildings in flood hazard areas as established in Section 1612.3, 
the opening requirements of ASCE 24 are authorized to be satisfied by 
ventilation openings that are designed and installed in accordance with ASCE 
24.
1612.4  Design and construction.  SEE BLOCK 6
1612.5  Flood hazard documentation.  [Flood hazard areas not subject to high 
velocity wave action]  
SEE BLOCK 13

22
NFIP Regulations
(6)	Require that manufactured homes that are 
placed or substantially improved within Zones 
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on 
sites (i) Outside of a manufactured home park or 
subdivision,(ii) In a new manufactured home 
park or subdivision, (iii) In an expansion to an 
existing manufactured home park or 
subdivision, or (iv) In an existing manufactured 
home park or subdivision on which a 
manufactured home has incurred “substantial 
damage” as the result of a flood, be elevated on 
a permanent foundation such that the lowest 
floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or 
above the base flood elevation and be securely 
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation 
system to resist floatation collapse and lateral 
movement.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G.  Section 501  Manufactured Homes.  SEE BLOCK 16

23
NFIP Regulations
(7)	Require within any AO zone on the 
community's FIRM that all new construction and 
substantial improvements of residential 
structures have the lowest floor (including 
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent 
grade at least as high as the depth number 
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at 
least two feet if no depth number is specified); 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION  SEE DEFINITIONS
1612.4  Design and construction.  SEE BLOCK 6  

24
NFIP Regulations
 (8)	Require within any AO zone on the 
community's FIRM that all new construction and 
substantial improvements of nonresidential 
structures (i) have the lowest floor (including 
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent 
grade at least as high as the depth number 
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at 
least two feet if no depth number is specified), or 
(ii) together with attendant utility and sanitary 
facilities be completely floodproofed to that level 
to meet the floodproofing standard specified in 
Sec.  60.3(c)(3)(ii); 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION  SEE DEFINITIONS
1603.1.6  Flood design data.  SEE BLOCK 6
1612.4  Design and construction.  SEE BLOCK 6
1807.1.2.1  Flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 18
3403.1.1  Flood hazard areas (Existing buildings or structures).  SEE BLOCK 4

25
NFIP Regulations
 (9)	Require within any A99 zones on a 
community's FIRM the standards of paragraphs 
(a)(1) through (a)(4)(i) and (b)(5) through (b)(9) 
of this section; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1603.1.6  Flood design data.  SEE BLOCK 6
1612.4  Design and construction.  SEE BLOCK 6
1807.1.2.1  Flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 18
3403.1.1  Flood hazard areas (Existing buildings or structures).  SEE BLOCK 4

26
NFIP Regulations
 (10)	Require until a regulatory floodway is 
designated, that no new construction, 
substantial improvements, or other development 
(including fill) shall be permitted within Zones 
A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless 
it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of 
the proposed development, when combined 
with all other existing and anticipated 
development, will not increase the water surface 
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at 
any point within the community.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R106.2.5.1  Design flood elevation. SEE BLOCK 6
1803.4  Grading and fill in flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 6
Appendix G103.4  Activities in riverine flood hazard areas.  In riverine 
flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified but floodways 
have not been designated, the building official shall not permit any new 
construction, substantial improvement or other development, including fill, 
unless the applicant demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed 
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood 
hazard area encroachment, will not increase the design flood elevation more 
than one foot at any point within the community.  

27
NFIP Regulations
 (11)	Require within Zones AH and AO, adequate 
drainage paths around structures on slopes, to 
guide floodwaters around and away from 
proposed structures.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G401.5  Storm drainage.  SEE BLOCK 6

28
NFIP Regulations
 (12)	Require that manufactured homes to be 
placed or substantially improved on sites in an 
existing manufactured home park or subdivision 
within Zones A-1-30, AH, and AE on the 
community's FIRM that are not subject to the 
provisions of paragraph (c)(6) of this section be 
elevated so that either (i) The lowest floor of the 
manufactured home is at or above the base flood 
elevation, or (ii) The manufactured home 
chassis is supported by reinforced piers or 
other foundation elements of at least equivalent 
strength that are no less than 36 inches in 
height above grade and be securely anchored to 
an adequately anchored foundation system to 
resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G501  Manufactured Homes.  SEE BLOCK 16

29
NFIP Regulations
(13)	Notwithstanding any other provisions of 
Sec.  60.3, a community may approve certain 
development in Zones Al-30, AE, and AH, on the 
community's FIRM which increase the water 
surface elevation of the base flood by more than 
one foot, provided that the community first 
applies for a conditional FIRM revision, fulfills 
the requirements for such a revision as 
established under the provisions of Sec.  65.12, 
and receives the approval of the Administrator.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G103.5  Floodway encroachment.  Prior to issuing a permit for any 
floodway encroachment, including fill, new construction, substantial 
improvements and other development or land disturbing activity, the building 
official shall require submission of a certification, along with supporting 
technical data, that demonstrates that such development will not cause any 
increase of the level of the base flood.
Appendix G103.5.1  Floodway revision.  A floodway encroachment that increases 
the level of the base flood is authorized if the applicant has applied for a 
conditional FIRM revision and has received the approval of FEMA.

30
NFIP Regulations
 (14)	Require that recreational vehicles placed 
on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the 
community's FIRM either(i) Be on the site for 
fewer than 180 consecutive days, (ii) Be fully 
licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) Meet 
the permit requirements of paragraph (b)(1) of 
this section and the elevation and anchoring 
requirements for “manufactured homes” in 
paragraph (c)(6) of this section.  A recreational 
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its 
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site 
only by quick disconnect type utilities and 
security devices, and has no permanently 
attached additions.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G601.1  Placement prohibited (Recreational Vehicles).  The placement 
of recreational vehicles shall not be authorized in flood hazard areas 
subject to high velocity wave action and in floodways.
Appendix G601.2  Temporary placement.  Recreational vehicles in flood hazard 
areas shall be fully licensed and ready for highway use, and shall be placed 
on a site for less than 180 consecutive days.
Appendix G601.3  Permanent placement.  Recreational vehicles that are not 
fully licensed and ready for highway use, or that are to be placed on a site 
for more than 180 consecutive days shall meet the requirements of Section 
G501 for manufactured homes.


(d) When the Administrator has provided a notice of final base flood 
elevations within Zones A1-30 and/or AE on the community's FIRM and, if 
appropriate, has designated AO zones, AH zones, A99 zones, and A zones on the 
community's FIRM, and has provided data from which the community shall 
designate its regulatory floodway, the community shall:

31
NFIP Regulations
 (1) Meet the requirements of paragraphs (c) (1) 
through (14) of this section;

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Prior provisions cumulative]

32
NFIP Regulations
(2)	Select and adopt a regulatory floodway 
based on the principle that the area chosen for 
the regulatory floodway must be designed to 
carry the waters of the base flood, without 
increasing the water surface elevation of that 
flood more than one foot at any point; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1612.3  Establishment of flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 3
Appendix G103.4  Activities in riverine flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 26

33
NFIP Regulations
(3)	Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new 
construction, substantial improvements, and 
other development within the adopted 
regulatory floodway unless it has been 
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic 
analyses performed in accordance with 
standard engineering practice that the 
proposed encroachment would not result in any 
increase in flood levels within the community 
during the occurrence of the base flood 
discharge; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1803.4  Grading and fill in flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 6
Appendix G103.5  Floodway encroachment.  SEE BLOCK 29
Appendix G103.5.1  Floodway revision.  SEE BLOCK 29
Appendix G401.1  Development in floodways.  Development or land disturbing 
activity shall not be authorized in the floodway unless it has been 
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in 
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment 
will not result in any increase in the level of the base flood.
Appendix J101.2 Flood hazard areas.  The provisions of this chapter shall not 
apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and 
embankments, in floodways within flood hazard areas established in Section 
1612.3, or in flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified 
but floodways have not been designated, unless it has been demonstrated 
through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with 
standard engineering practice that the proposed work will not result in any 
increase in the level of the base flood.  

34
NFIP Regulations
 (4)	Notwithstanding any other provisions of 
Sec.  60.3, a community may permit 
encroachments within the adopted regulatory 
floodway that would result in an increase in base 
flood elevations, provided that the community 
first applies for a conditional FIRM and 
floodway revision, fulfills the requirements for 
such revisions as established under the 
provisions of Sec.  65.12, and receives the 
approval of the Administrator.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1803.4  Grading and fill in flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 6
Appendix G103.5.1  Floodway revision.  SEE BLOCK 29


(e) When the Administrator has provided a notice of final base flood 
elevations within Zones A1-30 and/or AE on the community's FIRM and, if 
appropriate, has designated AH zones, AO zones, A99 zones, and A zones on the 
community's FIRM, and has identified on the community's FIRM coastal high 
hazard areas by designating Zones V1-30, VE, and/or V, the community shall.  

35
NFIP Regulations
 (1)  Meet the requirements of paragraphs (c)(1) 
through (14) of this section;[Prior provisions cumulative]

36
NFIP Regulations
 (2)  Within Zones V1-30, VE, and V on a 
community's FIRM, 
(i)	obtain the elevation (in relation to mean 
sea level) of the bottom of the lowest 
structural member of the lowest floor 
(excluding pilings and columns) of all new 
and substantially improved structures, and 
whether or not such structures contain a 
basement, and 
(ii)	maintain a record of  all such information 
with the official designated by the 
community under Sec.  59.22(a)(9)(iii); 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
104.7  Department records 
1603.1.6  Flood design data.  SEE BLOCK 6
1612.1  General (Flood Loads).  SEE BLOCK 4
1612.5  Flood hazard documentation. The following documentation shall be 
prepared and sealed by a registered design professional and shall be 
submitted to the building official:  
2.	For construction in flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave 
action:
	2.1  The elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural 
member as required by the lowest floor elevation inspection in Section 
109.3.3.
	2.2  Construction documents shall include a statement that the building 
is designed in accordance with ASCE 24, including that the pile or column 
foundation and building or structure to be attached thereto is designed to be 
anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the 
effects of wind and flood loads acting simultaneously on all building 
components, and other load requirements of Chapter 16.
	2.3  For breakaway walls designed to resist a nominal load of less that 
10 psf  (0.48 kN/m2) or more than 20 psf (0.96 kN/m2), construction documents 
shall include a statement that the breakaway wall is designed in accordance 
with ASCE 24.

Appendix G103.8  Records.  SEE BLOCK 1
Appendix G501  Manufactured Homes.  SEE BLOCK 16

37
NFIP Regulations
 (3)  Provide that all new construction within 
Zones V1-30, VE, and V on the community's 
FIRM is located landward of the reach of mean 
high tide; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G401.2  Flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action.  In 
flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action:
1.	New buildings and buildings that are substantially improved  shall only 
be authorized landward of the reach of mean high tide.  
2.	The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited.

38
NFIP Regulations
 (4)  Provide that all new construction and 
substantial improvements in Zones V1-30 and 
VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation data 
is available, on the community's FIRM, are 
elevated on pilings and columns so that 
(i)	the bottom of the lowest horizontal 
structural member of the lowest floor 
(excluding the pilings or columns) is 
elevated to or above the base flood level; 
and
(ii)	the pile or column foundation and structure 
attached thereto is anchored to resist 
flotation, collapse and lateral movement 
due to the effects of wind and water loads 
acting simultaneously on all building 
components.  Water loading values used 
shall be those associated with the base 
flood.  Wind loading values used shall be 
those required by applicable State or local 
building standards.  A registered 
professional engineer or architect shall 
develop or review the structural design, 
specifications and plans for the 
construction, and shall certify that the 
design and methods of construction to be 
used are in accordance with accepted 
standards of practice for meeting the 
provisions of paragraphs (e)(4)(i) and (ii) 
of this section.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
109.3.3  Lowest floor elevation.  SEE BLOCK 13
1603.1.6  Flood design data.  SEE BLOCK 6
1605.2.2  Other loads.  SEE BLOCK 6
1605.3.1.2  Other loads.  SEE BLOCK 6
1612.4  Design and construction.  SEE BLOCK 6
1612.5  Flood hazard documentation.  [Flood hazard areas subject to high 
velocity wave action] SEE BLOCK 36

39
NFIP Regulations
(5)  Provide that all new construction and 
substantial improvements within Zones V1-30, 
VE, and V on the community's FIRM have the 
space below the lowest floor either free of 
obstruction or constructed with non-supporting 
breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or 
insect screening intended to collapse under 
wind and water loads without causing collapse, 
displacement, or other structural damage to the 
elevated portion of the building or supporting 
foundation system.  For the purposes of this 
section, a breakaway wall shall have a design 
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and 
no more than 20 pounds per square foot.  Use of 
breakaway walls which exceed a design safe 
loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot 
(either by design or when so required by local 
or State codes) may be permitted only if a 
registered professional engineer or architect 
certifies that the designs proposed meet the 
following conditions:
(i)	Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a 
water load less than that which would occur 
during the base flood; and, 
(ii)	The elevated portion of the building and 
supporting foundation system shall not be 
subject to collapse, displacement, or other 
structural damage due to the effects of wind 
and water loads acting simultaneously on 
all building components (structural and 
non-structural).  Water loading values used 
shall be those associated with the base 
flood.  Wind loading values used shall be 
those required by applicable State or local 
building standards.  
Such enclosed space shall be useable solely for 
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1403.7  Flood resistance for high-velocity wave action areas.  For buildings 
in flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave action as established in 
Section 1612.3, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing system components shall 
not be mounted on or penetrate through exterior walls that are designed to 
break away under flood loads.  
1612.4  Design and construction.  The design and construction of buildings 
and structures located in flood hazard areas, including flood hazard areas 
subject to high velocity wave action, shall be in accordance with ASCE 24.
1612.5.2  Flood hazard documentation.  [Flood hazard areas subject to high 
velocity wave action] SEE BLOCK 36
[For utility components, see Appendix D for texts from IMC and IPC.]

40
NFIP Regulations
(6)	Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings within 
Zones V1-30, VE, and V on the community's FIRM; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
1803.4  Grading and fill in flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 6
Appendix G401.2  Flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action.  
SEE BLOCK 37

41
NFIP Regulations
 (7)	Prohibit man-made alteration of sand 
dunes and mangrove stands within Zones 
V1-30, VE, and V on the community's FIRM 
which would increase potential flood damage.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G103.7  Alterations in coastal areas.  Prior to issuing a permit for 
any alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands in flood hazard areas 
subject to high velocity wave action, the building official shall require 
submission of an engineering analysis which demonstrates that the proposed 
alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage.

42
NFIP Regulations
 (8)	Require that manufactured homes placed or 
substantially improved within Zones V1-30, V, 
and VE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) 
Outside of a manufactured home park or 
subdivision, (ii) In a new manufactured home 
park or subdivision, (iii) In an expansion to an 
existing manufactured home park or 
subdivision, or (iv) In an existing manufactured 
home park or subdivision on which a 
manufactured home has incurred “substantial 
damage” as the result of a flood, meet the 
standards of paragraphs (e)(2) through (7) of 
this section and that manufactured homes 
placed or substantially improved on other sites 
in an existing manufactured home park or 
subdivision within Zones VI-30, V, and VE on 
the community's FIRM meet the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(12) of this section.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G501.  Manufactured Homes.  SEE BLOCK 16

43
NFIP Regulations
(9)	Require that recreational vehicles placed 
on sites within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the 
community's FIRM either (i) Be on the site for 
fewer than 180 consecutive days, (ii) Be fully 
licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) Meet 
the requirements in paragraphs (b)(1) and (e) (2) 
through (7) of this section.  A recreational 
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its 
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site 
only by quick disconnect type utilities and 
security devices, and has no permanently 
attached additions.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G601.  Recreational Vehicles.  SEE BLOCK 30


Sec. 60.6  Variance and exceptions


44
NFIP Regulations
 (a)	The Administrator does not set forth 
absolute criteria for granting variances from the 
criteria set forth in Secs. 60.3, 60.4, and 60.5.  
The issuance of a variance is for flood plain 
management purposes only.  Insurance 
premium rates are determined by statute 
according to actuarial risk and will not be 
modified by the granting of a variance.  The 
community, after examining the applicant's 
hardships, shall approve or disapprove a 
request.  While the granting of variances 
generally is limited to a lot size less than 
one-half acre (as set forth in paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section), deviations from that limitation may 
occur.  However, as the lot size increases 
beyond one-half acre, the technical justification 
required for issuing a variance increases.  The 
Administrator may review a community's 
findings justifying the granting of variances, 
and if that review indicates a pattern 
inconsistent with the objectives of sound flood 
plain management, the Administrator may take 
appropriate action under Sec.  59.24(b) of this 
subchapter.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G105.1  General (Variances).  The board of appeals established 
pursuant to Section 112 shall hear and decide requests for variances.  The 
board of appeals shall base its determination on technical justifications, 
and has the right to attach such conditions to variances as it deems 
necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this appendix and Section 
1612.
Appendix G105.6  Considerations.  In reviewing applications for variances, 
the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant 
factors, all other portions of this appendix, and 
the following:
1.	The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands 
resulting in further injury or damage;
2.	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3.	The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to 
flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners;
4.	The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to 
the community;
5.	The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development 
that are not subject to flooding or erosion;
6.	The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and 
anticipated development;
7.	The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan 
and floodplain management program for that area;
8.	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and 
emergency vehicles;
9.	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and debris and 
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if 
applicable, expected at the site, and;
10.	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood 
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and 
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets and 
bridges.

45
NFIP Regulations
Variances may be issued for the repair or 
rehabilitation of historic structures upon a 
determination that the proposed repair or 
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's 
continued designation as a historic structure 
and the variance is the minimum necessary to 
preserve the historic character and design of 
the structure.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G105.3  Historic structures.  A variance is authorized to be issued 
for the repair or rehabilitation of a historic structure upon a determination 
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's 
continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is the 
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the 
structure.
Exception:  within flood hazard areas, historic structures that are not:
a.	Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for listing in the 
National Register of Historic Places; or
b.	Determined by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Interior as 
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district 
or a district preliminarily determined to qualify as an historic district; or
c.	Designated as historic under a state or local historic preservation 
program that is approved by the Department of Interior. 

46
NFIP Regulations
Procedures for the granting of variances by a 
community are as follows.  (1) Variances shall 
not be issued by a community within any 
designated regulatory floodway if any increase 
in flood levels during the base flood discharge 
would result; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G105.5  Restrictions.  The board of appeals shall not issue a 
variance for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in flood 
levels would result during the base flood discharge.

47
NFIP Regulations
 (2)	Variances may be issued by a community 
for new construction and substantial 
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half 
acre or less in size contiguous to and 
surrounded by lots with existing structures 
constructed below the base flood level, in 
conformance with the procedures of paragraphs 
(a) (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this section; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G105.1  General (Variances).  SEE BLOCK 44
Appendix G105.6  Considerations.  SEE BLOCK 44

48
NFIP Regulations
 (5)	Variances shall only be issued by a 
community upon
(i)	a showing of good and sufficient cause, 
(ii)	a determination that failure to grant the 
variance would result in exceptional 
hardship to the applicant, and 
(iii)	a determination that the granting of a 
variance will not result in increased flood 
heights, additional threats to public safety,  
extraordinary public expense, create 
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization 
of the public, or conflict with existing local 
laws or ordinances; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G105.7  Conditions for issuance.  Variances shall only be issued by 
the board of appeals upon:
1.	A technical showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique 
characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site renders 
the elevation standards inappropriate; and
2.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in 
exceptional hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable; and
3.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in 
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary 
public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the 
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and
4.	A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering 
the flood hazard, to afford relief; and
5.	Notification to the applicant in writing over the signature of the 
building official that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure 
below the base flood level will result in increased premium 
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance 
coverage, and that such construction below the base flood level increases 
risks to life and property.

49
NFIP Regulations
 (4)	Variances shall only be issued upon a 
determination that the variance is the minimum 
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to 
afford relief; 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G105.7  Conditions for issuance.  BLOCK 48

50
NFIP Regulations
 (5)  A community shall notify the applicant in 
writing over the  signature of a community 
official that 
(i)	the issuance of a variance to construct a 
structure below the base flood level will 
result in increased premium rates for flood 
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for 
$100 of insurance coverage and 
(ii)	such construction below the base flood 
level increases risks to life and property.  
Such notification shall be maintained with a 
record of all variance actions as required in 
paragraph (a)(6) of this section; and 

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G105.7  Conditions for issuance.  SEE BLOCK 48

51
NFIP Regulations
 (6)	A community shall (i) maintain a record of 
all variance actions, including justification for 
their issuance, and (ii) report such variances 
issued in its annual or biennial report submitted 
to the Administrator.  

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G105.2  Records.  The building official shall maintain a permanent 
record of all variance 
actions, including justification for their issuance.

52
NFIP Regulations
 (7)	Variances may be issued by a community 
for new construction and substantial 
improvements and for other development 
necessary for the conduct of a functionally 
dependent use provided that 
(i)	the criteria of paragraphs (a)(1) through 
(a)(4) of this section are met, and 
(ii)	the structure or other development is 
protected by methods that minimize  flood 
damages during the base flood and create 
no additional threats to public safety.

2006 IBC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Appendix G105.4  Functionally dependant facilities.  A variance is authorized 
to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement of a 
functionally dependant facility provided the criteria in Section 1612.1 are 
met and the variance is the minimum necessary to allow the construction or 
substantial improvement, and that all due consideration has been given to 
methods and materials that minimize flood damages during the design flood and 
create no additional threats to public safety.

[End of Appendix B]


Appendix C. Crosswalk of the NFIP Regulations to the Flood Resistance 
Provision of the IRC

Crosswalk of the NFIP Regulations to the Flood Resistance Provisions of the 
IRC™.


Sec. 59.1  Definitions

NFIP Regulations
BASE FLOOD.  Base flood means the flood having a one 
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given 
year.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]R301.2.4  Floodplain 
construction.  SEE BLOCK 3
Table R301.2(1)  Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.  Flood Hazards.  
SEE 
BLOCK 3
R324.1.3  Establishing the design flood elevation.  SEE BLOCK 12

NFIP Regulations
BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground 
level) on all sides.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]R324.1.4  Lowest 
floor.  SEE BLOCK 28
R324.2.1  [Flood hazard areas (including A Zones)] Elevation requirements.  
SEE BLOCK 18
R324.3.2  [Coastal flood hazard areas (including V Zones)] Elevation 
requirements.  SEE BLOCK 36
R408.5  [Under-Floor Space] Finished grade.  SEE BLOCK 18

NFIP Regulations
DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or 
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to 
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, 
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or 
storage of equipment or materials.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R101.2  Scope.
R105.1  Permits required.
R105.2  Work exempt from permit.
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in 
areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4

NFIP Regulations
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION (EXISTING STRUCTURES).  
For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which 
the “start of construction” commenced before the effective 
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs 
effective before that date.  “Existing construction” may also 
be referred to as “existing structures.”

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]R102.7.2  [Existing 
Structures] Additions, alterations or repairs.  SEE BLOCK 4
BUILDING, EXISTING in Chapter 2.

NFIP Regulations
FLOOD OR FLOODING.
(a)	A general and temporary condition of partial or 
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from.  
	(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.  
	(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of 
surface waters from any source.  

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement] 
[General usage throughout.]

NFIP Regulations
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of 
a community, on which the Administrator has delineated 
both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones 
applicable to the community.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]R301.2.4  Floodplain 
construction.  Exception.  SEE BLOCK 3
Table R301.2(1)  Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.  Flood Hazards.  
SEE 
BLOCK 3

NFIP Regulations
FLOODWAY – See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]R301.2.4  Floodplain 
construction.  Exception.  SEE BLOCK 3
Table R301.2(1)  Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.  Flood Hazards.  
SEE 
BLOCK 3

NFIP Regulations 
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural 
elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next 
to the proposed walls of a structure. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R324.2.1  [Flood hazard areas (including A Zones)] Elevation requirements.  
SEE BLOCK 18

NFIP Regulations
HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
(a)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic 
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of 
Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary 
of the Interior as meeting the requirements for 
individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary 
of the Interior as contributing to the historical 
significance of a registered historic district or a 
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to 
qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic 
places in states with historic preservation programs 
which have been approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior; or 
(d)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic 
places in communities with historic preservation 
programs that have been certified either.  
	(1) By an approved state program as determined by 
the Secretary of the Interior or 
	(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states 
without approved programs.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement] 
[Not explicitly defined; refer to definition in IBC®.]

NFIP Regulations
LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed 
area (including basement).  An unfinished or flood 
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, 
building access or storage in an area other than a 
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; 
provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render 
the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation 
design requirements of Sec. 60.3.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R309.5  [Garages and Carports] Flood hazard areas.  SEE BLOCK 21
R324.1.4  Lowest floor.  SEE BLOCK 18

NFIP Regulations
MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one 
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis 
and is designed for use with or without a permanent 
foundation when attached to the required utilities.  The 
term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational 
vehicle.”

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Chapter 2,  MANUFACTURED HOME.
Appendix E  Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings.

NFIP Regulations
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A 
parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or 
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement] 
[Subdivision of land not addressed in IRC™; see IBC® Appendix G.]

NFIP Regulations
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is.  
(a)	built on a single chassis; 
(b)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest 
horizontal projection; 
(c)	designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable 
by a light  duty truck; and 
(d)	designed primarily not for use as a permanent 
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for 
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R107 Temporary structures and uses.

NFIP Regulations
REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or 
other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be 
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without 
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more 
than a designated height.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
See FLOODWAY.

NFIP Regulations
REMEDY A VIOLATION.  to bring the structure or other 
development into compliance with State or local flood 
plain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to 
reduce the impacts of its noncompliance.  Ways that 
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or 
other affected development from flood damages, 
implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance 
or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing 
Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or 
other development.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R113  Violations.

NFIP Regulations
STRUCTURE.  For flood plain management purposes, a 
walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid 
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a 
manufactured home.  “Structure” for insurance coverage 
purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than 
a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above 
ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a 
manufactured home on a permanent foundation.  For the 
latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the 
course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not 
include building materials or supplies intended for use in 
such construction, alteration or repair, unless such 
materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on 
the premises.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R102.1  Scope.
R105.2  Work exempt from permit.
Appendix E  Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings.

NFIP Regulations
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained 
by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to 
its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 
percent of the market value of the structure before the 
damage occurred.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4

NFIP Regulations
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, 
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a 
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent 
of the market value of the structure before the “start of 
construction” of the improvement.  This term includes 
structures which have incurred “substantial damage”, 
regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term 
does not, however, include either.  
(1)	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct 
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or 
safety code specifications which have been identified 
by the local code enforcement official and which are 
the minimum necessary to assure safe living 
conditions or 
(2)	Any alteration of a “historic structure”, provided that 
the alteration will not preclude the structure's 
continued designation as a “historic structure.”  

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R102.7.1  [Existing structures] Additions, alterations or repairs.
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R108.3  Building permit valuations.

NFIP Regulations
VARIANCE.  A grant of relief by a community from the terms 
of a flood plain management regulation.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R104.10.1  [Modifications] Areas prone to flooding.  BLOCK 44
R112.2.2  Criteria for issuance of a variance for flood hazard areas.  SEE 
BLOCK 47

NFIP Regulations
VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other 
development to be fully compliant with the community's 
flood plain management regulations.  A structure or other 
development without the elevation certificate, other 
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 
Sec.  60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) 
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that 
documentation is provided.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R113  Violations.


Sec. 59.22  [This section outlines actions to be taken by communities to be 
eligible for the Program, including application procedures, documentation 
requirements, 
and a commitment to fulfill certain functions and responsibilities.]

1
NFIP Regulations 
(a)(9)(iii) Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request 
certificates of elevation and certificates of floodproofing. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R104.7  Department records.
  
2
NFIP Regulations
(b)(1) Appoint the agency or official with the responsibility, authority, and 
means to implement the commitments, including certain reporting requirements. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R103  Department of Building Safety.
R104  Duties and Powers of Code Official.


Sec. 60.2  Minimum compliance with flood plain management criteria. 
[Sections (a) through (c) pertain to meeting specific criteria set forth 
herein, as a function of the type of flood-related hazard and the level of 
detail provided on the flood hazard map prepared by FEMA.  Section (e) 
provides for coordination with State Coordinating Agencies with respect to 
submission of regulations for participation in the NFIP; Section (f) 
addresses 
the community function to submit reports periodically, when requested; and 
Section (g) directs communities to assure that their comprehensive plans are 
consistent with floodplain management objectives.]

3
NFIP Regulations
(h) The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations 
based on data provided by the Administrator.  Without 
prior approval of the Administrator, the community shall not adopt and 
enforce 
floodplain management regulations based upon modified data reflecting natural 
or man-made changes. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R301.2.4  Floodplain construction.  Buildings and structures constructed in 
whole or in part in flood hazard areas (including A or V Zones) as 
established 
in Table R301.2(1) shall be designed and constructed in accordance with 
Section R324.
Exception:  Buildings and structures in identified floodways established in 
Table R301.2(1) shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Flood 
Resistant Design and Construction (ASCE 24).
Table R301.2(1)  Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.  Flood Hazards.  
The 
jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the 
jurisdiction’s entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of 
adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard 
areas), 
(b) 
the dates(s) of the currently effective FIRM and FBFM, or other flood hazard 
map adopted by the community, as may be amended.
R324.1  General.  Buildings and structures constructed in whole or in part in 
flood hazard areas (including A or V Zones) as established in Table 301.2(1) 
shall be designed and constructed with the provisions in this section.   
Exception: Buildings and structures located in whole or in part in identified 
floodways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 24.


Sec. 60.3  Floodplain management criteria for flood-prone areas. 
(a) When the Administrator has not defined the special flood hazard areas 
within a community, has not provided water surface elevation data, and has 
not 
provided sufficient data to identify the floodway or coastal high hazard 
area, 
but the community has indicated the presence of such hazards by submitting an 
application to participate in the Program, the community shall:

4
NFIP Regulations
(1) Require permits for all proposed construction or other development, 
including the placement of manufactured homes, to determine whether such 
development is proposed within flood hazard areas; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R101.2  Scope.
R102.7.1  [Existing structures] Additions, alterations or repairs.  
Additions, 
alterations or repairs to any structure shall conform to that required for a 
new structure without requiring the existing structure to comply with all of 
the requirements of this code, unless otherwise stated.  Additions, 
alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe 
or adversely affect the performance of the building.
R105.2  Work exempt from permit.
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  For applications for 
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of existing 
buildings or structures located in an area prone to flooding as established 
by 
Table R301.2(1), the building official shall examine or cause to be examined 
the construction documents and shall prepare a finding with regard to the 
value of the proposed work.  For buildings that have sustained damage of any 
origin, the value of the proposed work shall include the cost to repair the 
building or structure to its predamage condition.  If the building official 
finds that the value of proposed work equals or exceeds 50 percent of the 
market value of the building or structure before the damage has occurred or 
the improvement is started, the finding shall be provided to the board of 
appeals for a determination of substantial improvement or substantial damage.  
Applications determined by the board of appeals to constitute substantial 
improvement or substantial damage shall require all existing portions of the 
entire building or structure to meet the requirements of R324.
R106.1.3  Information for construction in areas prone to flooding.  For 
buildings and structures located in whole or in part in flood hazard areas as 
established by Table R301.2(1), construction documents shall include:
1.	Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries, and flood 
zones, 
and the design flood elevation, as appropriate;
2.	The elevation of the proposed lowest floor, including basement; in 
areas 
of shallow flooding (AO zones), the height of the proposed lowest floor, 
including basement, above the highest adjacent finished grade; 
3.	The elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member 
in coastal high hazard areas (V Zone); and
4.	If design flood elevations are not included on the community’s Flood 
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the code official and the applicant shall obtain 
and reasonably utilize any design flood elevation and floodway data available 
from other sources.
R301.2.4  Floodplain construction.  SEE BLOCK 3  
Table R301.2(1)  Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.  Flood Hazards..  
SEE BLOCK 3
R324.2  Flood hazard areas (including A Zones).  All areas that have been 
determined to be prone to flooding but not subject to high velocity wave 
action shall be designated as flood hazard areas. All buildings and 
structures 
constructed in whole or in part in flood hazard areas shall be designed and 
constructed in accordance with Sections R324.2.1 through R324.2.3.
Appendix E  Manufactured Housing, Section AE101 Scope.  Exception:  In 
addition to these provisions, new and replacement manufactured homes to be 
located in flood hazard areas as established by Table R301.2(1) of the 
International Residential Code shall meet the applicable requirements of 
Section R324 of the International Residential Code.
Appendix J  Existing Buildings and Structures, Section AJ102.5 Flood hazard 
areas.  Work performed in existing buildings located in a flood hazard area 
as 
established by Table 301.2(1) shall be subject to the provisions of 
R105.3.1.1.  

5
NFIP Regulations
(2) Review proposed development to assure 
that all necessary permits have been received 
from other governmental agencies from which 
approval is required by Federal or State law, 
including section 404 of the Federal Water 
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 
U.S.C. 1334; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R105.3.1  (Permits) Action on application.

6
NFIP Regulations
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building 
sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.  If a proposed building site is 
in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements 
shall

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R301.1  Design.  Buildings and structures, and all parts thereof, shall be 
constructed to support safely all loads, including dead loads, live loads, 
roof loads, flood loads, snow loads, wind loads and seismic loads as 
prescribed in this code. The construction of buildings and structures shall 
result in a system that provides a complete load path capable of transferring 
all loads from their point of origin through the load-resisting elements to 
the foundation.
R301.2.4  Floodplain construction.  SEE BLOCK 3
R324.1  [Flood Resistant Construction] General.  Exception.  [Refers to IBC® 
for floodway 
construction.)  SEE BLOCK 3
R324.1.1  Structural systems.  All structural systems of all buildings and 
structures shall be designed, 
connected and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or permanent lateral 
movement due to structural loads and stresses from flooding equal to the 
design flood elevation.
R324.1.2  Flood-resistant construction.  All buildings and structures erected 
in areas prone to flooding shall be constructed by methods and practices that 
minimize flood damage.
R324.1.5 Protection of mechanical, plumbing and electrical systems. 
Electrical 
systems, equipment and components, and heating, ventilating, air 
conditioning, 
and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service 
equipment shall be located at or above the design flood elevation.  If 
replaced as part of a substantial improvement, electrical systems, equipment 
and components, and heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and plumbing 
appliances, plumbing fixtures, duct systems, and other service equipment 
shall 
meet the requirements of this section.  Systems, fixtures, and equipment and 
components shall not be mounted on or penetrate through walls intended to 
break away under flood loads.  
Exception:  Electrical systems, equipment and components, and heating, 
ventilating, air conditioning, and plumbing appliances, plumbing fixtures, 
duct systems, and other service equipment are permitted to be located below 
the design flood elevation provided that they are designed and installed to 
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components and to 
resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects 
of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation 
in compliance with the flood-resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24.  
Electrical wiring systems are permitted to be located below the design flood 
elevation provided they conform to the provisions of the electrical part of 
this code for wet locations.

6
NFIP Regulations
(i)	be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, 
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting 
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, 
(ii)	be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, 
(iii)	be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages, 
and
(iv)	be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air 
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or 
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the 
components during conditions of flooding.  

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R324.1.7  Flood-resistant materials.  Building materials used below the 
design 
flood elevation shall comply with the following:
1.	All wood, including floor sheathing, shall be pressure preservatively 
treated in accordance with 
AWPA U1 for the species, product, preservative and end use or the decay-
resistant heartwood or redwood, black locust, or cedars.  Preservatives shall 
conform to AWPA P1/13, P2, P3 or P5.
2.	Materials and installation methods used for flooring and interior and 
exterior walls and wall coverings shall conform to the provisions of 
FEMA/FIA-
TB-2.
R324.2.3  Foundation design and construction.  Foundation walls for all 
buildings and structures erected in flood hazard areas shall meet the 
requirements of Chapter 4.
Exception: Unless designed in accordance with Section 404.
1.	The unsupported height of 6 inches (152 mm) plain masonry walls shall 
be 
no greater than 3 feet (914 mm).
2.	The unsupported height of 8 inches (203 mm) plain masonry walls shall 
be 
no greater than 4 feet (1219 mm).
3.	The unsupported height of 8 inches (203 mm) reinforced masonry walls 
shall be no greater than 8 feet (2438 mm).
For the purpose of this exception, unsupported height is the distance from 
the 
finished grade to the under-floor space and the top of the wall.
R401.1  [Foundations] Application.  The provisions of this chapter shall 
control the design and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces 
for all buildings.  In addition to the provisions 
of this chapter, the design and construction of foundations in areas prone to 
flooding as established by Table R301.2(1) shall meet the provisions of 
Section R324.  
M1401.5  Flood hazard.   In areas prone to flooding as established by Table 
R301.2(1), heating and cooling equipment and appliances shall be located or 
installed in accordance with Section R324.1.5
M1601.3.8  Flood hazard areas.  In areas prone to flooding as established by 
Table R301.2(1), duct systems shall be located or installed in accordance 
with 
Section R324.1.5M1701.6  [Combustion air] Opening location.  In areas prone 
to 
flooding as established by Table R301.2(1), openings shall be located at or 
above the design flood elevation established in Section R324.
M2001.3  Flood resistant installation.  In areas prone to flooding as 
established in Table R301.2(1), boilers, water heaters, and their control 
systems shall be located or installed in accordance with Section R324.1.5.
G2404.7 (301.11)  Flood hazard.  For structures located in flood hazard 
areas, 
the appliance, equipment and system installations regulated by this code 
shall 
be located or installed at or above the design flood elevation and shall 
comply with the flood-resistant construction requirement of Section R324.
Exception:  The appliance, equipment and system installations regulated by 
this code are permitted to be located below the design flood elevation 
provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering 
or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and 
hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during 
the 
occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation and shall comply with 
the 
flood-resistant construction requirements of Section R324.
M2201.6  Flood resistant installation. In areas prone to flooding as 
established by Table R301.2(1), tanks shall be installed at or above the 
design flood elevation established in Section R324 or shall be anchored to 
prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement under conditions of the 
design flood.            
G2404.7 (301.11)  Flood hazard.  For structures located in areas prone to 
flooding as established by Table R301.2(1), the appliance, equipment and 
system installations regulated by this code shall be located or installed in 
accordance with Section R324.1.5.  
P2601.3  Flood hazard area.  In areas prone to flooding as established by 
Table R301.2(1), plumbing fixtures, drains, and appliances shall be located 
or 
installed in accordance with Section R324.1.5.
P2705.1  General.  
7.  In areas prone to flooding as established by Table R301.2(1), plumbing 
fixtures shall be located or installed in accordance with Section R324.1.5. 
P3001.3  Flood resistant installation.  In areas prone to flooding as 
established by Table R301.2(1), drainage waste and vent systems shall be 
located and installed to prevent infiltration of floodwaters into the systems 
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.  
P3101.5  Flood resistance.  In areas prone to flooding as established by 
Table 
R301.2(1), vents shall be located at or above the design flood elevation 
established in Sec. R324.
Appendix E  Manufactured Housing, Section AE502.3 Footings and foundations.  
Piers and bearing walls shall be supported on masonry or concrete foundations 
or piles or other approved foundation systems which shall be of sufficient 
capacity to support all loads.

7
NFIP Regulations
(4) Review subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, 
including 
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals 
will be reasonably safe from flooding.  If a subdivision proposal or other 
proposed new development is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall 
be 
reviewed to assure that:
(i)	all such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood 
damage 
within the flood-prone area, 
(ii)	all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, 
and 
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood 
damage, and 
(iii)adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
[Subdivision of land not addressed in IRC™; see IBC® Appendix G.]

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R324.1.6  Protection of water supply and sanitary sewage systems.  New and 
replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate 
infiltration of flood waters into the systems in accordance with the plumbing 
provisions of this code. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be 
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into systems 
and 
discharges from systems into floodwaters in accordance with the plumbing 
provisions of this code and Chapter 3 of the International Private Sewage 
Disposal Code.  

8
NFIP Regulations
(5) Require within flood-prone areas new and replacement water supply systems 
to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of 
flood waters into the systems; and 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R324.1.6  Protection of water supply and sanitary sewage systems.  SEE BLOCK 
7 
P2602.2  Flood resistant installation.  In areas prone to flooding as 
established by Table R301.2(1):
1.	Water-supply systems shall be designed and constructed to prevent 
infiltration of floodwaters.
2.	Pipes for sewage disposal systems shall be designed and constructed to 
prevent infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the 
systems into floodwaters.  

9
NFIP Regulations
(6) Require within flood-prone areas 
(i)	new and replacement sanitary sewage 
systems to be designed to minimize or 
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into 
the systems and discharges from the 
systems into flood waters and 
(ii)	onsite waste disposal systems to be 
located to avoid impairment to them or 
contamination from them during flooding. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R324.1.6  Protection of water supply and sanitary sewage systems.  SEE BLOCK 
7


(b) When the Administrator has designated areas of special flood hazards (A 
zones) by the publication of a community's FHBM or FIRM, but has neither 
produced water surface elevation data nor identified a floodway or coastal 
high hazard area, the community shall: 


10
NFIP Regulations
(1)	Require permits for all proposed construction and other developments 
including the placement of manufactured homes, within Zone A on the 
community's FHBM or FIRM;
(2) Require the application of the standards in paragraphs (a) (2), (3), (4), 
(5) and (6) of this section to development within Zone A on the community's 
FHBM or FIRM;

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Prior provisions cumulative.]

11
NFIP Regulations
(3) Require that all new subdivision proposals 
and other proposed developments (including 
proposals for manufactured home parks and 
subdivisions)greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, 
whichever is the lesser, include within such 
proposals base flood elevation data; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Subdivision of land not addressed in IRC™; see IBC® Appendix G.]

12
NFIP Regulations
(4) Obtain, review and reasonably utilize any 
base flood elevation and floodway data 
available from a Federal, State, or other source, 
including data developed pursuant to 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section, as criteria for 
requiring that new construction, substantial 
improvements, or other development in Zone A 
on the community's FHBM or FIRM meet the 
standards in paragraphs (c)(2), (c)(3), (c)(5), 
(c)(6), (c)(12), (c)(14), (d)(2) and (d)(3) of this 
section; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R106.1.3(3)  Information for construction in areas prone to flooding.  SEE 
BLOCK 4  
R324.1.3 Establishing the design flood elevation. The design flood elevation 
shall be used to define areas prone to flooding, and shall describe, at a 
minimum, the base flood elevation at the depth of peak elevation of flooding 
(including wave height) which has a 1 percent (100–year flood) or greater 
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
R324.1.3.1 Determination of design flood elevations.  If design flood 
elevations are not specified, the building official is authorized to require 
the applicant to:  
1.	Obtain and reasonably utilize data available from a federal, state or 
other source, or  
2.	Determine the design flood elevation in accordance with accepted 
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering practices used to define special flood 
hazard areas.  Determinations shall be undertaken by a registered design 
professional who shall document that the technical methods used reflect 
currently accepted engineering practice.  Studies, analyses, and computations 
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow thorough review and 
approval.  
R324.1.3.2 Determination of impacts.  In riverine flood hazard areas where 
design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, 
the applicant shall demonstrate that the effect of the proposed buildings and 
structures on design flood elevations, including fill, when combined with all 
other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not 
increase the design flood elevation more than one foot at any point within 
the 
jurisdiction.  
 
13
NFIP Regulations
(5) Where base flood elevation data are utilized, within Zone A on the 
community's FHBM or FIRM:  
(i)	Obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest 
floor 
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures, and 
(ii)	Obtain, if the structure has been floodproofed in accordance with 
paragraph (c)(3)(ii) of this section, the elevation (in relation to mean sea 
level) to which the structure was floodproofed, and (iii) Maintain a record 
of 
all such information with the official designated by the community under Sec. 
59.22 (a)(9)(iii); 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R104.7  Department records
R109.1.3  Floodplain inspections.  For construction in areas prone to 
flooding 
as established by Table 301.2(1), upon placement of the lowest floor, 
including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building 
official shall require submission of documentation, prepared and sealed by a 
registered design professional, of the elevation of the lowest floor, 
including basement, required in Section R324.  
R324.1.9  As-built elevation documentation.  A registered design professional 
shall prepare and seal documentation of the elevations specified in Section 
R324.2 or R324.3.  

[NFIP requirement 60.3(b)(5)(ii) applies to non-residential construction; see 
IBC®.]

14
NFIP Regulations
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent 
communities and the State Coordinating Office 
prior to any alteration or relocation of a 
watercourse, and submit copies of such 
notifications to the Administrator; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Not addressed in IRC™, see IBC® Appendix G.]

15
NFIP Regulations
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity 
within the altered or relocated portion of any 
watercourse is maintained; 
2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Not addressed in IRC™, see IBC® Appendix G.]

16
NFIP Regulations
(8)  Require that all manufactured homes to be 
placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM 
or FIRM shall be installed using methods and 
practices which minimize flood damage. For 
the purposes of this requirement, manufactured 
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist 
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. 
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not 
to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame 
ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in 
addition to applicable State and local 
anchoring requirements for resisting wind 
forces. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R324.1.8  Manufactured housing.  New or replacement manufactured housing 
shall 
be elevated in accordance with Section R324.2 and the anchor and tie-down 
requirements of Sections AE604 and AE605 of Appendix E shall apply. The 
foundation and anchorage of manufactured housing to be located in identified 
flood ways as established in Table R301.2(1) shall be designed and 
constructed 
in accordance with the applicable provisions in the International Building 
Code.
Appendix E  Manufactured Housing, Section AE101 Exception  SEE BLOCK 4


(c) When the Administrator has provided a notice of final flood elevations 
for 
one or more special flood hazard areas on the community's FIRM and, if 
appropriate, has designated other special flood hazard areas without base 
flood elevations on the community's FIRM, but has not identified a regulatory 
floodway or coastal high hazard area, the community shall: 


17
NFIP Regulations
(1) Require the standards of paragraph (b) of this section within all A1-30 
zones, AE zones, A zones, AH zones, and AO zones, on the community's FIRM; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Prior provisions cumulative.]

18
NFIP Regulations
(2) Require that all new construction and 
substantial improvements of residential 
structures within Zones A1-30, AE and AH 
zones on the community's FIRM have the 
lowest floor (including basement) elevated to 
or above the base flood level, unless the 
community is granted an exception by the 
Administrator for the allowance of basements in 
accordance with Sec. 60.6 (b) or (c);

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R324.2.1  [Flood hazard areas (including A Zones)] Elevation requirements.
1.	Buildings and structures shall have the lowest floors elevated to or 
above the design flood elevation.
2.	In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall 
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above 
the 
highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet (mm) on the 
FIRM, 
or at least 2 feet (51 mm) if a depth number is not specified.
3.	Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to 
or above the design flood elevation.
Exception: Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation, including 
basements whose floors are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the 
requirements of Section R324.2.2.
R324.1.4  Lowest floor.  The lowest floor shall be the floor of the lowest 
enclosed area, including basement, but excluding any unfinished flood-
resistant enclosure that is useable solely for vehicle parking, building 
access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to 
render the building or structure in violation of this section.
R408.5  (Under-Floor Space) Finished grade.  . . . where there is evidence 
that the surface water does not readily drain from the building site, the 
grade in the under-floor space shall be as high as the outside finished 
grade, 
unless an approved drainage system is provided.
Appendix J Existing Buildings and Structures, Section AJ102.5 Flood hazard 
areas.  SEE BLOCK 4

19
NFIP Regulations 
(3)	Require that all new construction and 
substantial improvements of non-residential 
structures within Zones A1-30, AE and AH 
zones on the community's firm:  
(i)	have the lowest floor (including basement) 
elevated to or above the base flood level 
or, 
(ii)	together with attendant utility and sanitary 
facilities, be designed so that below the 
base flood level the structure is watertight 
with walls substantially impermeable to the 
passage of water and with structural 
components having the capability of 
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic 
loads and effects of buoyancy; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[NFIP requirement 60.3(c)(3) applies to non-residential construction, see 
IBC®.]

20
NFIP Regulations
(4)	Provide that where a non-residential 
structure is intended to be made watertight 
below the base flood level, 
(i)	A registered professional engineer or 
architect shall develop and/or review 
structural design, specifications, and 
plans for the construction, and shall 
certify that the design and methods of 
construction are in accordance with 
accepted standards of practice for meeting 
the applicable provisions of paragraph 
(c)(3)(ii) or (c)(8)(ii) of this section, and 
(ii)	A record of such certificates which 
includes the specific elevation (in relation 
to mean sea level) to which such 
structures are floodproofed shall be 
maintained with the official designated by 
the community under Sec. 59.22(a)(9)(iii); 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[NFIP requirement 60.3(c)(4) applies to non-residential construction, see 
IBC®.]

21
NFIP Regulations 
 (5) Require, for all new construction and 
substantial improvements, that fully enclosed 
areas below the lowest floor that are usable 
solely for parking of vehicles, building access 
or storage in an area other than a basement 
and which are subject to flooding shall be 
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic 
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for 
the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for 
meeting this requirement must either be 
certified by a registered professional engineer 
or architect or meet or exceed the following 
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings 
having a total net area of not less than one 
square inch for every square foot of enclosed 
area subject to flooding shall be provided. The 
bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 
one foot above grade. Openings may be 
equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or 
other coverings or devices provided that they 
permit the automatic entry and exit of 
floodwaters.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R309.5  [Garages] Flood hazard areas.  For buildings located in flood hazard 
areas as established by Table 301.2(1), garage floors shall be:
Elevated to or above the design flood elevation as determined in Section 
R324; 
or
Located below the design flood elevated provided they are at or above grade 
on 
at least one side, are used solely for parking, building access, or storage, 
meet the requirements of Section R324, and are otherwise constructed in 
accordance with this code.
R324.2.2  Enclosed area below design flood elevation.  Enclosed areas, 
including crawl spaces, that 
are below the design flood elevation shall:
1.	Be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.
2.	Be provided with flood openings which shall meet the following 
criteria:
2.1  There shall be a minimum of two openings on different sides of each 
enclosed area; if a building has more than one enclosed area below the design 
flood elevation, each area shall have openings on exterior walls.
2.2  The total net area of all openings shall be at least 1 square inch (645 
mm²) for each square foot (0.093 m²) of enclosed area, or the openings shall 
be designed and the construction documents shall include a statement that the 
design and installation will provide for equalization of hydrostatic flood 
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of 
floodwaters.  
2.3  The bottom of each opening shall be 1 foot (305 mm) or less above the 
adjacent ground level.
2.4  Openings shall be not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in any direction in the 
plane of the wall.
2.5  Any louvers, screens or other opening covers shall allow the automatic 
flow of floodwaters into and out of the enclosed area.
2.6  Openings installed in doors and windows that meet requirements 2.1 
through 2.5, are acceptable; however, doors and windows without installed 
openings do not meet the requirements of this section.
R408.6  [Under-Floor Space] Flood resistance.  For buildings located in areas 
prone to flooding as established in Table R301.2(1):	
1.	Walls enclosing the underfloor space shall be provided with flood 
openings in accordance 
with Section R324.2.2.
2.	The finished ground level of the underfloor space shall be equal to or 
higher than the outside finished ground level.  
Exception:  Underfloor spaces that meet the requirements of FEMA/FIA TB 11-1.  
(TB 11-1 is Crawl Space Construction in Special Flood Hazard Areas)

22
NFIP Regulations
(6) Require that manufactured homes that are 
placed or substantially improved within Zones 
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on 
sites (i) Outside of a manufactured home park 
or subdivision,(ii) In a new manufactured home 
park or subdivision, (iii) In an expansion to an 
existing manufactured home park or 
subdivision, or (iv) In an existing manufactured 
home park or subdivision on which a 
manufactured home has incurred “substantial 
damage” as the result of a flood, be elevated on 
a permanent foundation such that the lowest 
floor of the manufactured home is elevated to 
or above the base flood elevation and be 
securely anchored to an adequately anchored 
foundation system to resist floatation collapse 
and lateral movement. 
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in 
areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R324.1.8  Manufactured housing.  SEE BLOCK 16
Appendix E  Manufactured Housing, Section AE101, Exception  SEE BLOCK 4

23
NFIP Regulations
(7) Require within any AO zone on the 
community's FIRM that all new construction 
and substantial improvements of residential 
structures have the lowest floor (including 
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent 
grade at least as high as the depth number 
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at 
least two feet if no depth number is specified); 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R324.2.1  [Flood hazard areas (including A Zones)] Elevation requirements.  
SEE BLOCK 18

24
NFIP Regulations
(8) Require within any AO zone on the 
community's FIRM that all new construction 
and substantial improvements of 
nonresidential structures (i) have the lowest 
floor (including basement) elevated above the 
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the 
depth number specified in feet on the 
community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth 
number is specified), or (ii) together with 
attendant utility and sanitary facilities be 
completely floodproofed to that level to meet 
the floodproofing standard specified in Sec. 
60.3(c)(3)(ii); 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[NFIP requirement 60.3(c)(8) applies to non-residential construction, see 
IBC®.]

25
NFIP Regulations 
(9) Require within any A99 zones on a 
community's FIRM the standards of paragraphs 
(a)(1) through (a)(4)(i) and (b)(5) through (b)(9) 
of this section; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R324.2.1  [Flood hazard areas (including A Zones)] Elevation requirements.  
SEE BLOCK 18

26
NFIP Regulations
(10) Require until a regulatory floodway is 
designated, that no new construction, 
substantial improvements, or other 
development (including fill) shall be permitted 
within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's 
FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the 
cumulative effect of the proposed development, 
when combined with all other existing and 
anticipated development, will not increase the 
water surface elevation of the base flood more 
than one foot at any point within the 
community. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R106.1.3  Information for construction in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 
4

27
NFIP Regulations 
(11) Require within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths around 
structures 
on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R401.3  [Foundations] Drainage.  Surface drainage shall be diverted to a 
storm 
sewer connection or other approved point of collection so as to not create a 
hazard.  Lots shall be graded so as to drain surface water away from 
foundation walls. . . .  

28
NFIP Regulations
(12) Require that manufactured homes to be 
placed or substantially improved on sites in an 
existing manufactured home park or 
subdivision within Zones A-1-30, AH, and AE 
on the community's FIRM that are not subject to 
the provisions of paragraph (c)(6) of this 
section be elevated so that either (i) The lowest 
floor of the manufactured home is at or above 
the base flood elevation, or (ii) The 
manufactured home chassis is supported by 
reinforced piers or other foundation elements 
of at least equivalent strength that are no less 
than 36 inches in height above grade and be 
securely anchored to an adequately anchored 
foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, 
and lateral movement. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R324.1.8  Manufactured housing.  SEE BLOCK 16
Appendix E  Manufactured Housing, Section AE101.1  General.  Exception.  SEE 
BLOCK 4

29
NFIP Regulations
(13) Notwithstanding any other provisions of 
Sec. 60.3, a community may approve certain 
development in Zones Al-30, AE, and AH, on 
the community's FIRM which increase the water 
surface elevation of the base flood by more 
than one foot, provided that the community first 
applies for a conditional FIRM revision, fulfills 
the requirements for such a revision as 
established under the provisions of Sec. 65.12, 
and receives the approval of the Administrator. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Not addressed in IRC™, see IBC® Appendix G.]

30
NFIP Regulations
(14) Require that recreational vehicles placed 
on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the 
community’s FIRM either (I) Be on the site for 
fewer than 180 consecutive days, (ii) Be fully 
licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) 
Meet the permit requirements of paragraph 
(b)(1) of this section and the elevation and 
anchoring requirements for “manufactured 
homes” in paragraph (c)(6) of this section. A 
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if 
it is on its wheels or jacking system, is 
attached to the site only by quick disconnect 
type utilities and security devices, and has no 
permanently attached additions. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R107  Temporary structures.


(d) When the Administrator has provided a notice of final base flood 
elevations within Zones A1-30 and/or AE on the community's FIRM and, if 
appropriate, has designated AO zones, AH zones, A99 zones, and A zones on the 
community's FIRM, and has provided data from which the community shall 
designate its regulatory floodway, the community shall:



31
NFIP Regulations 
(1) Meet the requirements of paragraphs (c) (1) 
through (14) of this section;

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Prior provisions cumulative.]

32
NFIP Regulations
(2) Select and adopt a regulatory floodway 
based on the principle that the area chosen for 
the regulatory floodway must be designed to 
carry the waters of the base flood, without 
increasing the water surface elevation of that 
flood more than one foot at any point; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
Table  R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.  Flood Hazards.  
SEE 
BLOCK 3


33
NFIP Regulations
(3) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new 
construction, substantial improvements, and 
other development within the adopted 
regulatory floodway unless it has been 
demonstrated through hydrologic and 
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance 
with standard engineering practice that the 
proposed encroachment would not result in 
any increase in flood levels within the 
community during the occurrence of the base 
flood discharge; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R106.1.3  Information for construction in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 
4
R301.2.4  Floodplain construction.  Exception.  SEE BLOCK 3

34
NFIP Regulations 
(4) Notwithstanding any other provisions of 
Sec. 60.3, a community may permit 
encroachments within the adopted regulatory 
floodway that would result in an increase in 
base flood elevations, provided that the 
community first applies for a conditional FIRM 
and floodway revision, fulfills the requirements 
for such revisions as established under the 
provisions of Sec. 65.12, and receives the 
approval of the Administrator. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[IRC™ not applicable to floodway construction; refer to IBC®.]  


(e) When the Administrator has provided a notice of final base flood 
elevations within Zones A1-30 and/or AE on the community's FIRM and, if 
appropriate, has designated AH zones, AO zones, A99 zones, and A zones on the 
community's FIRM, and has identified on the community's FIRM coastal high 
hazard areas by designating Zones V1-30, VE, and/or V, the community shall: 


35
NFIP Regulations
(1) Meet the requirements of paragraphs (c)(1) 
through (14) of this section;
[Prior provisions cumulative.]
R301.2.4.1  Alternative provisions.  As an alternative to the requirements in 
Section R324.3 for buildings and structures located in whole or in part in 
coastal high hazard areas (V Zones), ASCE 24 is permitted subject to the 
limitations of this code and the limitations therein. 

36
NFIP Regulations
(2)	Within Zones V1-30, VE, and V on a 
community's FIRM, 
(i)	obtain the elevation (in relation to 
mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest 
structural member of the lowest floor 
(excluding pilings and columns) of all new 
and substantially improved structures, and 
whether or not such structures contain a 
basement, and 
(ii)	maintain a record of  all such 
information with the official designated by 
the community under Sec. 59.22(a)(9)(iii); 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R104.7  Department records.
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R106.1.3  Information for construction in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 
13
R109.1.3  Floodplain inspections.  SEE BLOCK 13
R324.1.9  As-built elevation documentation.  SEE BLOCK 13 
R324.3  Coastal high hazard areas (including V Zones).  Areas that have been 
determined to be subject to wave heights in excess of 3 feet (914 mm) or 
subject to high velocity wave action or wave–induced erosion shall be 
designated as coastal high hazard areas. All buildings and structures 
constructed in whole or in part in coastal high hazard areas shall be 
designated and constructed in accordance with Sections R324.3.1 through 
R324.3.6.  
R324.3.2  [Coastal flood hazard areas (including V Zones)] Elevation 
requirements.  
1.	All buildings and structures erected within coastal high hazard areas 
shall be elevated so that the lowest portion of all structural members 
supporting the lowest floor, with the exception of mat or raft foundations, 
piling, pile caps, columns, grade beams and bracing, is located at or above 
the design flood elevation.
2.	Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited.
3.	The use of fill for structural support is prohibited.
4.	The placement of fill beneath buildings and structures is prohibited.
Exception: Walls and partitions enclosing areas below the design flood 
elevation shall meet the requirements of Sections R324.3.4 and R324.3.5.

37
NFIP Regulations 
(3) Provide that all new construction within Zones V1-30, VE, and V on the 
community's FIRM is located landward of the reach of mean high tide; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R324.3.1  Location and site preparation.  
1.  New buildings and buildings that are determined to be substantially 
improved pursuant to Section 105.3.1.1, shall be located landward of the 
reach 
of mean high tide.
2.  Site preparations shall not alter sand dunes and mangrove stands if an 
engineering analysis demonstrates that the potential for flood damage is 
increased.

38
NFIP Regulations 
(4)  Provide that all new construction and 
substantial improvements in Zones V1-30 and 
VE, and also Zone V if base flood elevation 
data is available, on the community's FIRM, are 
elevated on pilings and columns so that 
(i)	the bottom of the lowest horizontal 
structural member of the lowest floor 
(excluding the pilings or columns) is 
elevated to or above the base flood level; 
and 
(ii)	the pile or column foundation and 
structure attached thereto is anchored to 
resist flotation, collapse and lateral 
movement due to the effects of wind and 
water loads acting simultaneously on all 
building components. Water loading 
values used shall be those associated with 
the base flood. Wind loading values used 
shall be those required by applicable State 
or local building standards.  A registered 
professional engineer or architect shall 
develop or review the structural design, 
specifications and plans for the 
construction, and shall certify that the 
design and methods of construction to be 
used are in accordance with accepted 
standards of practice for meeting the 
provisions of paragraphs (e)(4)(I) and (ii) 
of this section. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R324.3.2  [Coastal high hazard areas (including V Zones)] Elevation 
requirements.  SEE BLOCK 36
R324.3.3  Foundations.  All buildings and structures erected in coastal high 
hazard areas shall be supported on pilings or columns and shall be adequately 
anchored to such pilings or columns. Piling shall have adequate soil 
penetrations to resist the combined wave and wind loads (lateral and uplift). 
Water loading values used shall be those associated with the design flood. 
Wind loading values shall be those required by this code. Pile embedment 
shall 
include consideration of decreased resistance capacity caused by scour of 
soil 
strata surrounding the piling. Pile systems design and installation shall be 
certified in accordance with Section R324.3.6. Mat, raft or other foundations 
that support columns shall not be permitted where soil investigations that 
are 
required in accordance with Section R401.4 indicate that soil material under 
the mat, raft or other foundation is subject to scour or erosion from wave–
velocity flow conditions.  Slabs, pools, pool decks and walkways shall be 
located and constructed to be structurally independent of buildings and 
structures and their foundations to prevent transfer of flood loads to the 
buildings and structures during conditions of flooding, scour or erosion from 
wave-velocity flow conditions, unless the buildings and structures and their 
foundation are designed to resist the additional flood load.  
R324.3.6  Construction documents.  The construction documents shall include 
documentation that is prepared and sealed by a registered design professional 
that the design and methods of construction to be used meet the applicable 
criteria of this section.  

39
NFIP Regulations
(5)	Provide that all new construction and sub-
stantial improvements within Zones V1-30, VE, 
and V on the community's FIRM have the space 
below the lowest floor either free of obstruction 
or constructed with non-supporting breakaway 
walls, open wood lattice-work, or insect 
screening intended to collapse under wind 
and water loads without causing collapse, 
displacement, or other structural damage to the 
elevated portion of the building or supporting 
foundation system. For the purposes of this 
section, a breakaway wall shall
have a design safe loading resistance of not 
less than 10 and no more than 20 pounds per 
square foot. Use of breakaway walls which 
exceed a design safe loading  resistance of 20 
pounds per square foot (either by design or 
when so required by local or State codes) may 
be permitted only if a registered professional 
engineer or architect certifies that the designs 
proposed meet the following conditions: 
(i)	Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a 
water load less than that which would 
occur during the base flood; and, 
(ii)	The elevated portion of the building and 
supporting foundation system shall not be 
subject to collapse, displacement, or other 
structural damage due to the effects of 
wind and water loads acting 
simultaneously on all building 
components (structural and 
non-structural). Water loading values used 
shall be those associated with the base 
flood. Wind loading values used shall be 
those required by applicable State or local 
building standards. Such enclosed space 
shall be useable solely for parking of 
vehicles, building access, or storage. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R105.3.1.1  Substantially improved or substantially damaged existing 
buildings 
and structures in 
areas prone to flooding.  SEE BLOCK 4
R324.3.4  Walls below design flood elevation.  Walls and partitions are 
permitted below the elevated floor, provided that such walls and partitions 
are not part of the structural support of the building or 
structure and:
1.	Electrical, mechanical, and plumbing system components are not to be 
mounted on or penetrate through walls that are designed to break away under 
flood loads, and
2.	Are constructed with insect screening or open lattice, or:
3.	Are designed to break away or collapse without causing collapse, 
displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the 
building or supporting foundation system. Such walls, framing and connections 
shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 pounds per 
square foot (0.48 kN/m2) and no more than 20 pounds per square foot (0.96 
kN/m2); 
or
4.	Where wind loading values of this code exceed 20 pounds per square foot 
(0.96 kN/m2), the construction documents shall include documentation prepared 
and sealed by a registered design professional that:
	4.1	The walls and partitions below the design flood elevation have 
been designed to collapse from a water load less than that which would occur 
during the design flood.
	4.2.	The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation 
system have been designed to withstand the effects of wind and flood loads 
acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and 
nonstructural).  Water loading values used shall be those associated with the 
design flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by this code.
R324.3.5  Enclosed areas below design flood elevation.  Enclosed areas below 
the design flood elevation shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, 
building access or storage.

40
NFIP Regulations
(6) Prohibit the use of fill for structural support 
of buildings within Zones V1-30, VE, and V on 
the community's FIRM; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R324.3.2(3) and (4)  [Coastal flood hazard areas (including V zones)] 
Elevation requirements.  SEE 
BLOCK 36

41
NFIP Regulations 
(7) Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes 
and mangrove stands within Zones V1-30, VE, 
and V on the community's FIRM which would 
increase potential flood damage. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R324.3.1  Location and site preparation.  SEE BLOCK 37

42
NFIP Regulations 
(8) Require that manufactured homes placed or 
substantially improved within Zones V1-30, V, 
and VE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) 
Outside of a manufactured home park or 
subdivision, (ii) In a new manufactured home 
park or subdivision, (iii) In an expansion to an 
existing manufactured home park or 
subdivision, or (iv) In an existing manufactured 
home park or subdivision on which a 
manufactured home has incurred “substantial 
damage” as the result of a flood, meet the 
standards of paragraphs (e)(2) through (7) of 
this section and that manufactured homes 
placed or substantially improved on other sites 
in an existing manufactured home park or 
subdivision within Zones VI-30, V, and VE on 
the community's FIRM meet the requirements of 
paragraph (c)(12) of this section. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R324.1.8  Manufactured housing.  SEE BLOCK 16
Appendix E  Manufactured Housing  AE101, Exception.  SEE BLOCK 4

43
NFIP Regulations
(9) Require that recreational vehicles placed on 
sites within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the 
community's FIRM either (i) Be on the site for 
fewer than 180 consecutive days, (ii) Be fully 
licensed and ready for highway use, or(iii) 
Meet the requirements in paragraphs (b)(1) and 
(e) (2) through (7) of this section. A 
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if 
it is on its wheels or jacking system, is 
attached to the site only by quick disconnect 
type utilities and security devices, and has no 
permanently attached additions. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R107  Temporary structures.


Sec. 60.6  Variance and exceptions

44
NFIP Regulations
(a) The Administrator does not set forth 
absolute criteria for granting variances from the 
criteria set forth in Secs. 60.3, 60.4, and 60.5. 
The issuance of a variance is for flood plain 
management purposes only. Insurance 
premium rates are determined by statute 
according to actuarial risk and will not be 
modified by the granting of a variance. The 
community, after examining the applicant's 
hardships, shall approve or disapprove a 
request.
While the granting of variances generally is 
limited to a lot size less than one-half acre (as 
set forth in paragraph (a)(2) of this section), 
deviations from that limitation may occur. 
However, as the lot size increases beyond 
one-half acre, the technical justification 
required for issuing a variance increases. The 
Administrator may review a community's 
findings justifying the granting of variances, 
and if that review indicates a pattern 
inconsistent with the objectives of sound flood 
plain management, the Administrator may take 
appropriate action under Sec. 59.24(b) of this 
subchapter. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R104.10.1  [Modifications] Areas prone to flooding.  The building official 
shall not grant modifications to any provision related to flood hazard areas 
as established by Table R301.2(1) without the granting of a variance to such 
provisions by the board of appeals.

45
NFIP Regulations 
Variances may be issued for the repair or 
rehabilitation of historic structures upon a 
determination that the proposed repair or 
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's 
continued designation as a historic structure 
and the variance is the minimum necessary to 
preserve the historic character and design of 
the structure.

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R112.2.1  Determination of substantial improvement in areas prone to 
flooding.  
When the building official provides a finding required in Section R105.3.1.1, 
the board of appeals shall determine whether the value of the proposed work 
constitutes a substantial improvement.  A substantial 
improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or 
improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 
50 
percent of the market value of the building or structure before the 
improvement or repair is started.  If the building or structure has sustained 
substantial damage, all repairs are considered substantial improvement 
regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not include:
1.	Improvements of a building or structure required to correct existing 
health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building 
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living 
conditions; 
or 
2.	Any alteration of a historic building or structure provided that the 
alteration will not preclude the continued designation as a historic building 
or structure.  For the purposes of this exclusion, a historic building is:
2.1  Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for listing in the 
National Register of Historic Places; or  
	Determined by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Interior as 
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district 
or a district preliminarily determined to qualify as an historic district; or  
	Designated as historic under a state or local historic preservation 
program that is approved by the Department of Interior.  

46
NFIP Regulations
Procedures for the granting of variances by a 
community are as follows: (1) Variances shall 
not be issued by a community within any 
designated regulatory floodway if any increase 
in flood levels during the base flood discharge 
would result; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R301.2.4  Floodplain construction.  Exception. [Floodway approvals not 
allowed, refer to IBC®.]  SEE BLOCK 3

47
NFIP Regulations 
(2) Variances may be issued by a community for 
new construction and substantial 
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half 
acre or less in size contiguous to and 
surrounded by lots with existing structures 
constructed below the base flood level, in 
conformance with the procedures of 
paragraphs (a) (3), (4), (5) and (6) of this 
section; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R112.2.2  Criteria for issuance of a variance for areas prone to flooding.  A 
variance shall only be issued upon:
1.	A showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics 
of the size, configuration, or topography of the site render the elevation 
standards of Section 324 inappropriate.
2.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in 
exceptional hardship by rendering the lot undevelopable.
3.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in 
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary 
public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the 
public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
4.	A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary to afford 
relief, considering the flood hazard. 
5.	Submission to the applicant of written notice specifying the difference 
between the design flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is 
to be built, stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate 
with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation, and 
stating that construction below the design flood elevation increases risks to 
life and property.

48
NFIP Regulations 
(3)	Variances shall only be issued by a 
community upon 
(i)	a showing of good and sufficient cause, 
(ii)	a determination that failure to grant the 
variance would result in exceptional 
hardship to the applicant, and 
(iii)	a determination that the granting of a 
variance will not result in increased flood 
heights, additional threats to public safety,  
extraordinary public expense, create 
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization 
of the public, or conflict with existing local 
laws or ordinances; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R112.2.2(2) and (3)  Criteria for issuance of a variance for areas prone to 
flooding.  SEE BLOCK 47

49
NFIP REgulations
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a 
determination that the variance is the minimum 
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to 
afford relief; 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R112.2.2(4)  Criteria for issuance of a variance for areas prone to flooding.  
SEE BLOCK 47

50
NFIP Regulations 
(4)	A community shall notify the applicant in 
writing over the  signature of a community 
official that 
(i)	the issuance of a variance to construct a 
structure below the base flood level will 
result in increased premium rates for flood 
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 
for $100 of insurance coverage and 
(ii)	such construction below the base flood 
level increases risks to life and property. 
Such notification shall be maintained with 
a record of all variance actions as required 
in paragraph (a)(6) of this section; and 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R104.7  Department Records.
R112.2.2(5)  Criteria for issuance of a variance for areas prone to flooding.  
SEE BLOCK 47

51
NFIP Regulations
(6) A community shall (i) maintain a record of 
all variance actions, including justification for 
their issuance, and (ii) report such variances 
issued in its annual or biennial report submitted 
to the Administrator. 

2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
R104.7  Department Records.
R112.1  [Board of Appeals] General.

52
NFIP Regulations
(7)	Variances may be issued by a community 
for new construction and substantial 
improvements and for other development 
necessary for the conduct of a functionally 
dependent use provided that 
(i)	the criteria of paragraphs (a)(1) through 
(a)(4) of this section are met, and 
(ii)	the structure or other development is 
protected by methods that minimize  flood 
damages during the base flood and create 
no additional threats to public safety.
2006 IRC® and Appendix G [annotated with 2007 Supplement]
[Functionally dependent uses are non-residential uses; refer to IBC®.]


[End of Appendix C]

Appendix D. Flood Resistance Provision of the IMC, IPC, IFGC, IPSDC & IEBC

Flood Resistance Provisions of the IMC, IPC, IFGC, IPSDC and the IEBC.

Code
2006 International Mechanical Code

Excerpts From 2006 editions of IMC, IPC, IFGC IPSDC, and the IEBC

M301.13 [B] Flood hazard. For structures located in flood hazard areas, 
mechanical systems, equipment and appliances shall be elevated at or above 
the design flood elevation.  
Exception:  Mechanical systems, equipment and appliances are permitted to be 
located below the design flood elevation provided that they are designed and 
installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the 
components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic 
loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence 
of flooding to the design flood elevation in compliance with the flood-
resistant construction requirements of the International Building Code.
M301.13.1  Walls below buildings in flood hazard areas subject to high 
velocity wave action.  In flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave 
action, mechanical systems and equipment shall not be mounted on or penetrate 
walls intended to break away under flood loads.  
M401.5.3 Flood hazard.  For structures located in flood hazard areas, outside 
air exhaust openings and air intake openings shall be located at or above the 
design flood elevation. M602.4 Flood hazard.  For structures located in flood 
hazard areas, plenum spaces shall be located 
above the design flood elevation or shall be located above the design flood 
elevation or shall be designed and constructed to prevent water from entering 
or accumulating within the plenum spaces during floods up to the design flood 
elevation.  If the plenum spaces are located below the design flood 
elevation, they shall be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic 
loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence 
of flooding to the design flood elevation. 
M603.13 Flood hazard areas.   For structures in flood hazard areas, ducts 
shall be located above the design flood elevation or shall be designed and 
constructed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the ducts 
during floods up to the design flood elevation.  If the ducts are located 
below the design flood elevation, the ducts shall be capable of resisting 
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of 
buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation.  
M1206.9.1 Flood hazard. Piping located in a flood hazard area zone shall be 
capable of resisting 
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of 
buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation.  
M1305.2.1 Flood hazard.  All fuel oil pipe, equipment and appliances located 
in flood hazard areas shall be located above the design flood elevation or 
shall be capable of resisting hydrostatic and 
hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during 
the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation.  

Code
2006 International Plumbing Code
Excerpts From 2006 editions of IMC, IPC, IFGC IPSDC, and the IEBC

P309.1 General. Plumbing systems and equipment in structures erected in flood 
hazard areas shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of this 
section and the International Building Code.  
P309.2 Flood hazard. For structures located in flood hazard areas, the 
following systems and equipment shall be located above the design flood 
elevation:  
Exception:   The following systems are permitted to be located below the 
design flood elevation provided that the systems are designed and installed 
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within their components and 
the systems are constructed to resist hydrostatic and 
hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during 
the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation.  
1. All water service pipes.
2. Pump seals in individual water supply systems where the pump is located 
below the base flood elevation.
3. Covers on potable water wells shall be sealed, except where the top of the 
casing well or pipe sleeve is elevated to at least 1 foot (304.8 mm) above 
the design flood elevation.
4. All sanitary drainage piping.
5. All storm drainage piping.
6. Manhole covers shall be sealed, except where elevated to or above the 
design flood elevation.
7. All other plumbing fixtures, faucets, fixture fittings, piping systems and 
equipment.  
8.  Water heaters.  
9.  Vents and vent systems.  
P309.3  Flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action.  Structures 
located in flood hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action shall meet 
the requirements of Section 309.2 and the plumbing systems, pipes and 
fixtures shall not be mounted on or penetrate through walls intended to 
breakaway under flood loads.  

Code
2006 International Fuel Gas Code

Excerpts From 2006 editions of IMC, IPC, IFGC IPSDC, and the IEBC

FG301.11 Flood hazard.  For structures located in flood hazard areas, the 
appliance, equipment and system installations regulated by this code shall be 
located at or above the design flood elevation and shall comply with the 
flood resistant construction requirements of the International Building Code.  
Exception:  The appliance, equipment and system installations regulated by 
this code are permitted to be located below the design flood elevation 
provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering 
or accumulating within the components and to resist 
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of 
buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding to the design flood elevation and 
shall comply with the flood-resistant construction requirements of the 
International Building Code.

Code
2006 International Private Sewage Development Code

Excerpts From 2006 editions of IMC, IPC, IFGC IPSDC, and the IEBC
PSDC106.2.3 Site plan. Site plans shall be filed showing to scale the 
location of all septic tanks, holding tanks or other treatment tanks, 
building sewers, wells, water mains, water service, streams and lakes, flood 
hazard areas, dosing or pumping chambers, distribution boxes, effluent 
systems, dual disposal systems, replacement system areas, and the location of 
all buildings or structures. All separating distances and dimensions shall be 
shown, including any distance to adjoining property. 
A vertical elevation reference point and a horizontal reference point shall 
be indicated. For other than single-family dwellings, grade slope with 
contours shall be shown for the grade elevation of the entire area of the 
soil absorption system and the area on all sides for a distance of 25 feet 
(7620 mm). 
PSDC108.7 Unsafe systems.  Any private sewage disposal system regulated by   
this code that is unsafe or that constitutes a health hazard, insanitary 
condition or is otherwise dangerous to human life is hereby declared unsafe.  
Any use of private sewage disposal systems regulated by this code 
constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of 
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, disaster, damage or 
abandonment is hereby declared an unsafe use.  
Any such unsafe equipment is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and 
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal
PSDC303.1  General.  Soil absorption sites shall be located outside of flood 
hazard areas.  
Exception:  Where suitable soil absorption sites outside of the flood hazard 
area are not available it is permitted for the soil absorption site to be 
located within the flood hazard area.  The soil absorption 
site shall be located to minimize the effects of inundation under conditions 
of the design flood. 
PSDC303.2  Tanks.  In flood hazard areas, tanks shall be anchored to counter 
buoyant forces during conditions of the design flood.  The vent termination 
and service manhole of the tank shall be a minimum of 2 feet (610 mm) above 
the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the 
inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during 
conditions of the design flood.  
PSDC303.3  Mound systems.  Mound systems in flood hazard areas shall be 
prohibited. 
PSDC401.2  Site evaluation.  Site evaluation shall include soil conditions, 
properties and permeability, depth to zones of soil saturation, depth to 
bedrock, slope, landscape positions, all 
setback requirements and the presence of flood hazard areas.  Soil test data 
shall relate to the undisturbed elevations, and a vertical elevation 
reference point or benchmark shall be established.  
Evaluation data shall be reported on approved forms.  Reports shall be filed 
for all sites investigated with 30 days of the completion of testing.  
PSDC403.4  Alluvial and colluvial deposits.  Subsurface soil absorption 
systems shall not be placed in alluvial and colluvial deposits with shallow 
depths, extended periods of saturation or possible 
flooding.
PSDC406.1  Soil absorption site locations.  The surface grade of all soil 
absorption systems shall be located at a point lower than the surface grade 
of any nearby water well or reservoir on the same or 
adjoining property.  Where this is not possible, the site shall be located so 
surface water drainage from the site is not directed toward a well or 
reservoir.  The soil absorption system shall be located 
with a minimum horizontal distance between various elements as indicated in 
Table 406.2.  Private sewage disposal systems in compacted areas, such as 
parking lots and driveways, are prohibited.  
Surface water shall be diverted away from any soil absorption site on the 
same or neighboring lots.PSDC406.1.1  Flood hazard areas.  The site shall be 
located outside of flood hazard areas.  
Exception:  Where suitable sites outside of the flood hazard area are not 
available it is permitted for the site to be located within the flood hazard 
area.  The site shall be located to minimize the effects of inundation under 
conditions of the design flood.  
PSDC902.2  Prohibited locations.  A mound system shall be prohibited on sites 
not having the minimum depths of soil specified in Table 902.2.  The 
installation of a mound in a filled area shall be prohibited.  A mound shall 
not be installed in a compacted area or over a failing conventional system.  

Code
2006 International Existing Building Code

Excerpts From 2006 editions of IMC, IPC, IFGC IPSDC, and the IEBC

101.2  Scope.  The provisions of the International Existing Building Code 
shall apply to the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and 
relocation of existing buildings.
101.3  Intent.  The intent of this code is to provide flexibility to permit 
the use of alternative approaches to achieve compliance with minimum 
requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, 
and welfare insofar as they are affected by the repair, alteration, change of 
occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings.  
101.5 Compliance methods. The repair, alteration, change of occupancy, 
addition or relocation of all existing buildings shall comply with one of the 
methods listed in Sections 101.5.1 through 101.5.3 as selected by the 
applicant. Application of a method shall be the sole basis for assessing the 
compliance of work performed under a single permit unless otherwise approved 
by the code official. 
Sections 101.5.1 through 101.5.3 shall not be applied in combination with 
each other.
Exception: Subject to the approval of the code official, alterations 
complying with the laws in existence at the time the building or the affected 
portion of the building was built shall be considered in compliance with the 
provisions of this code unless the building is undergoing more than a limited 
structural alteration as defined in Section 807.5.3. New structural members 
added as part of the alteration shall comply with the International Building 
Code.  Alterations of 
existing buildings in flood hazard areas shall comply with Section 601.3. 

104.10 Modifications.  Wherever there are practical difficulties in carrying 
out the provisions of this code, the code official shall have the authority 
to grant modifications for individual cases, upon 
application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the code 
official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict 
letter o this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the 
intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen 
health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements.  The 
details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the 
files of the department of building safety.
104.10.1  Flood hazard areas.  For existing buildings located in flood hazard 
areas for which the repairs, alterations, and additions constitute 
substantial improvement, the code official shall not grant modifications to 
provisions related to flood resistance unless a determination is made that  
1.  The applicant has presented good and sufficient cause that the unique 
characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site render 
compliance with the flood resistant construction provisions inappropriate.  
2.  Failure to grant the modification would result in exceptional hardship.  
3.  The granting of the modification will not result in increased flood 
heights, additional threats to 
public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause 
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or 
ordinances.  
4.  The modification is the minimum necessary to afford relief, considering 
the flood hazard.  
5.  A written notice will be provided to the applicant specifying, if 
applicable, the difference between the design flood elevation and the 
elevation to which the building is to be built, stating that the cost of 
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from 
the reduced floor elevation, and stating that construction below the design 
flood elevation increases risks to life and property.  
109.3.3  Lowest floor elevation.  For additions and substantial improvements 
to existing buildings in flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest 
floor, including basement, and prior to further 
vertical construction, the elevation documentation required in the 
International Building Code shall be submitted to the code official.  
DEFINITIONS
Flood Hazard Area.  The greater of the following two areas:
1. The area within a flood plain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of 
flooding in any year, or
2. The area designated as a flood hazard area on a community’s flood hazard 
map, or otherwise legally designated.
Historic Buildings.  Any building or structure that is (a) listed in the 
State or National Register of Historic Places, (b) designated as a historic 
property under local or state designation, law, or survey, 
(c) certified as a contributing resource within a National Register listed or 
locally designated historic district, or (d) with an opinion or certification 
that the property is eligible to be listed on the National 
or State Registers of Historic Places either individually or as a 
contributing building to a historic district by the State Historic 
Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of Historic 
Places.
Substantial Damage.  For the purpose of determining compliance with the flood 
provisions of this code, damage of any origin sustained by a structure 
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its 
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value 
of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement.  For the purpose of determining compliance with the 
flood provisions of this code, any repair, alteration, addition, or 
improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 
50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or 
repair is started.  If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any 
repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual 
repair work performed.  The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing 
health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the code official 
and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
2. Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will 
not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.
Chapter 3  Prescriptive Compliance Method
[B] Section 302  Additions, Alterations or Repairs
[B] 302.1.1  Flood hazard areas.  For buildings and structures in flood 
hazard areas established in Section 1612.3 of the International Building 
Code, any additions, alterations or repairs that constitute 
substantial improvement of the existing structure, as defined in Section 
1612.2 of the International Building Code, shall comply with the flood design 
requirements for new construction and all aspects of the existing structure 
shall be brought into compliance with the requirements for new construction 
for flood design.  
[B] Section 306  Historic Buildings
306.2  Flood hazard areas.  Within flood hazard areas established in 
accordance with Section 1612.3 of the International Building Code, where the 
work proposed constitutes substantial improvement as defined in Section 
1612.2 of the International Building Code, the building shall be brought into 
conformance with Section 1612 of the International Building Code.  
Exception:  Historic buildings that are:  
1. Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for listing in the 
National Register of Historic Places; or
2. Determined by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Interior as 
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district 
or a district preliminarily determined to qualify as an 
historic district; or
3. Designed as historic under a state or local historic preservation program 
that is approved by the Department of Interior.
Chapter 5 Repairs
501.4  Flood hazard areas.  In flood hazard areas, repairs that constitute 
substantial improvement shall require that the building comply with the 
International Building Code Section 1612.  
507.3  Damaged buildings.
507.3.5  Flood hazard areas.  In flood hazard areas, damaged buildings that 
have sustained substantial damage shall be brought into compliance with 
Section 1612 of the International Building Code.  
Chapter 6 Alterations – Level 1
601.3  Flood hazard areas.  In flood hazard areas, alterations that 
constitute substantial improvement shall require that the building comply 
with the International Building Code Section 1612.  
Chapter 7  Alterations – Level 2
701.2  Alteration level 1 compliance.  In addition to the requirements of 
this chapter, all work shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 6.
Chapter 8  Alterations – Level 3
801.2  Compliance.  In addition to the requirements of this chapter work 
shall comply with the requirements of Chapters 6 and 7.
Chapter 9 Change of Occupancy
901.1  Repair and alteration with no change of occupancy classification.  Any 
repair or alteration work undertaken in connection with a chance of occupancy 
that does not involve a change of occupancy classification as described in 
the International Building Code shall conform to the 
requirements of Chapters 5, 6, 7, and 8 respectively for the applicable 
occupancy group and the requirements of Section 902 through 911.
Sec. 912  Change of Occupancy Classification
912.1  Compliance with Chapter 8.  The occupancy classification of an 
existing building may be changed, provided the building meets all the 
requirements of Chapter 8 applied throughout the building for the new 
occupancy group, and complies with the requirements of Sections 902 through 
912.
Chapter 10  Additions
1001.1  Scope.  An addition to a building or structure shall comply with the 
building, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes, without requiring the 
existing building or structure to comply with any requirements of those codes 
or of these provisions except as required by this chapter. 

1003.1 Compliance with International Building Code.
1003.5  Flood Hazard Areas.  In flood hazard areas:
1.For horizontal additions that are structurally interconnected to the 
existing building:
1.1. If the addition and all other proposed work, when combined, constitute 
substantial 
improvement, the existing building and the addition shall comply with 
International Building 
Code Section 1612.
1.2. If the addition constitutes substantial improvement, the existing 
building and the addition 
shall comply with International Building Code Section 1612.
2. For horizontal additions that are not structurally interconnected to the 
existing building:
2.1. The addition shall comply with International Building Code Section 1612.
2.2. If the addition and all other proposed work, when combined, constitute 
substantial 
improvement, the existing building and the addition shall comply with 
International Building 
Code Section 1612.
3. For vertical additions and all other proposed work, when combined, that 
constitute substantial improvement, the existing building shall comply with 
International Building Code Section 1612.
4. For a new, replacement, raised or extended foundation, if the foundation 
work and all other proposed work, when combined, constitute substantial 
improvement, the existing building shall comply with International Building 
Code Section 1612.
Chapter 11 Historic Building
1101.4 Flood hazard areas.  In flood hazard areas, if all proposed work, 
including repairs, work required due to a change of occupancy, and 
alterations, constitutes substantial improvement then the 
existing building shall comply with International Building Code Section 1612.  
Exception.  If a historic building will continue to be a historic building 
after the proposed work is completed, then the proposed work is not 
considered to be a substantial improvement.  For the 
purposes of this exception, a historic building is:  
a.  Listed or preliminarily determined to be eligible for listing in the 
National Register of Historic Places; or  
b.  Determined by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Interior as 
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district 
or a district preliminarily determined to qualify as an historic district; or  
c.  Designated as historic under a state or local historic preservation 
program that is approved by the Department of Interior.  
Chapter 12  Relocated or Moved Buildings
1202.6  Flood hazard areas.  If relocated or moved into a flood hazard area, 
structures shall comply with International Building Code Section 1612.
Chapter 13  Compliance Alternatives
1301.3  Acceptance.  For repairs, alterations, additions and changes of 
occupancy to existing buildings that are evaluated in accordance with this 
section, compliance with this section shall be accepted by the code official.
1301.3.3  Compliance with flood hazard provisions.  In flood hazard areas, 
buildings that are evaluated in accordance with this section shall comply 
with International Building Code Section 1612 if the work covered by this 
section constitutes substantial improvement.

[End of Appendix D]

Appendix E. FEMA Regional Offices and NFIP State Coordinators

FEMA’s Regional Offices
FEMA HEADQUARTERS
Office of the Assistant Administrator, 
Mitigation
500 C Street, S.W.
Washington, DC  20472
(202) 646-2781

REGION I - CT, MA, ME, NH, RI, VT
Mitigation Division 
99 High St, 6th Floor
Boston, MA  02110 
(617) 832-4761

REGION II - NJ, NY, PR, VI
Mitigation Division 
26 Federal Plaza, Ste 1337 
New York, NY  10278-0002 
(212) 680-3600

REGION III - DE, DC, MD, PA, VA, WV
Mitigation Division 
615 Chestnut Street, Sixth Floor 
Philadelphia, PA  19106-4404 
(215) 931-5530

REGION IV - AL, FL, GA, KY, MS, 
NC, SC, TN
Mitigation Division 
3003 Chamblee-Tucker Road, Rm 270 
Atlanta, GA  30341 
(770) 220-5200

REGION V -IL, IN, MI, MN, OH, WI
Mitigation Division 
536 S. Clark Street, 6th Floor 
Chicago, IL  60605-1521 
(312) 408-5500

REGION VI - AR, LA, NM, OK, TX
Mitigation Division 
Federal Regional Center 
800 North Loop 288 
Denton, TX  76209-3698 
(940) 898-5399

REGION VII - IA, KS, MO, NE
Mitigation Division 
9221 Ward Pkwy, Ste 300 
Kansas City, MO  64114-3372 
(816) 283-7002

REGION VIII - CO, MT, ND, SD, UT, WY
Mitigation Division 
Denver Federal Center 
Building 710, Box 25267 
Denver, CO  80225-0267 
(303) 235-4800

REGION IX - AZ, CA, GU, HI, NV
Mitigation Division 
1111 Broadway, Ste 1200
Oakland, CA 94607-4053 
(415) 923-7100

REGION X - AK, ID, OR, WA
Mitigation Division 
Federal Regional Center 
130 228th Street, SW. 
Bothell, WA  98021-8627 
(425) 487-4600


NFIP State Coordinators
ALABAMA
Alabama Department of Economic & 
Community Affairs
NFIP State Coordinator
P.O. Box 5690
Montgomery, AL  36103-5690
(334) 353-0853  

ALASKA
Alaska Department of Commerce, 
Community & Economic Development
NFIP State Coordinator
550 W. 7th Avenue, Suite 1770
Anchorage, AK  99501-3510
(907) 269-4583   

ARIZONA
Arizona Department of Water 
Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
3550 N Central Avenue
Phoenix, AZ  85012-2105
(602) 771-8657

ARKANSAS
Arkansas Natural Resources 
Commission
NFIP State Coordinator
101 E. Capitol, Suite 350
Little Rock, AR  72201
(501) 682-3969  

CALIFORNIA
California Department of Water 
Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
3310 El Camino Ave
Sacramento, CA  95821
(916) 574-0611  

COLORADO
Colorado Water Conservation Board
NFIP State Coordinator
1313 Sherman St, Room 721
Denver, CO  80203
(303) 866-3803  

CONNECTICUT
Connecticut Department of 
Environmental Protection
NFIP State Coordinator
79 Elm Street
Hartford, CT  06106-5127
(860) 424-3706 

DELAWARE
Delaware Division of Soil and Water
NFIP State Coordinator
89 Kings Highway
Dover, DE  19901
(302) 739-9921  

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
District of Columbia Department of 
Health 
NFIP State Coordinator
51 N Street, NE Room 5021
Washington, DC  20002
(202) 535-2248  

FLORIDA
Florida Department of Community 
Affairs
NFIP State Coordinator
2555 Shumard Oak Boulevard
Tallahassee, FL  32399-2100
(850) 413-9960  

GEORGIA
Georgia Department of Natural 
Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
7 Martin Luther King, Jr. Dr Ste 440 
Atlanta, GA  30334
(404) 656-6382   

HAWAII
Hawaii Department of Land and 
Natural Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
PO Box 373
Honolulu, HI  96809
(808) 587-0267   

IDAHO
Idaho Department of Water Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
322 E Front Street
Boise, ID  83720
(208) 287-4928   

ILLINOIS
Illinois Department of Natural 
Resources
Office of Water Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
One Natural Resources Way
Springfield, IL  62702-1271
(217) 782-4428   

INDIANA
Indiana Division of Water
NFIP State Coordinator
402 W. Washington Street, 
Room W264
Indianapolis, IN  46204-2748
(317) 234-1107   

IOWA
Iowa Department of Natural Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
Wallace State Office Building
Des Moines, IA  50319
(515) 281-8942 

KANSAS
Kansas Department of Agriculture
Division of Water Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
109 SW 9th Street, 2nd Floor
Topeka, KS  66612-1283
(785) 296-5440   

KENTUCKY
Kentucky Division of Water
NFIP State Coordinator
14 Reilly Road
Frankfort, KY  40601
(502) 564-3410  

LOUISIANA
Louisiana Department of 
Transportation & Development
Floodplain Management Section
NFIP State Coordinator
P.O. Box 94245, Capitol Station
Baton Rouge, LA  70804-9425
(225) 274-4354   

MAINE
Maine State Planning Office
NFIP State Coordinator
38 State House Station
Augusta, ME  04333-0038
(207) 287-8063  

MARYLAND
Maryland Department of Environment 
NFIP State Coordinator
1800 Washington Boulevard, Ste 430
Baltimore, MD  21230
(410) 537-3775  

MASSACHUSETTS
Massachusetts Department of 
Conservation & Recreation
NFIP State Coordinator
251 Causeway Street, Suite 700
Boston, MA  02114
(617) 626-1406  

MICHIGAN
Michigan Department of 
Environmental Quality
NFIP State Coordinator
P.O. Box 38458
Lansing, MI  48909-7958
(517) 335-3448 

MINNESOTA
Minnesota Department of Natural 
Resources - Waters
NFIP State Coordinator
500 Lafayette Road
St. Paul, MN  55155-4032
(651) 259-5691   

MISSISSIPPI
Mississippi Emergency Management 
Agency
NFIP State Coordinator
P.O. Box 5644
Pearl, MS  39208
(601) 933-6844   

MISSOURI
Missouri State Emergency 
Management Agency
NFIP State Coordinator
P.O. Box 116
Jefferson City, MO  65102
(573) 526-9116   

MONTANA
Montana Floodplain Management 
Program
NFIP State Coordinator
1424 9th Avenue
Helena, MT  59620-1601
(406) 444-6654   

NEBRASKA
Nebraska Division of Natural 
Resources 
NFIP State Coordinator
301 Centennial Mall South
Lincoln, NE  68509-4876
(402) 471-3936  

NEVADA
Nevada Division of Water Planning
NFIP State Coordinator
901 S Steward Street Ste 2002
Carson City, NV  89701
(775) 684-2860

NEW HAMPSHIRE
New Hampshire Office of Energy & 
Planning
NFIP State Coordinator
57 Regional Dr, Ste 3
Concord, NH  03301-8519
(603) 271-2155   

NEW JERSEY
New Jersey Department of 
Environmental Protection
Flood Plain Management Section
NFIP State Coordinator
P.O. Box 419
Trenton, NJ  08625
(609) 984-0859

NEW MEXICO
New Mexico Office of Emergency 
Management 
NFIP State Coordinator
P.O. Box 1628
Santa Fe, NM  87504-1628
(505) 476-9617  

NEW YORK
New York State Department of 
Environmental Conservation
NFIP State Coordinator
625 Broadway
Albany, NY  12233-3507
(518) 402-8146   

NORTH CAROLINA
North Carolina Division of Emergency 
Management
NFIP State Coordinator
4713 Mail Service Center
Raleigh, NC  27699-4713
(919) 715-8000  

NORTH DAKOTA
North Dakota State Water Commission
NFIP State Coordinator
900 East Boulevard Avenue
Bismarck, ND  58505-0850
(701) 328-4898  

OHIO
Ohio Department of Natural Resources
Division of Water
NFIP State Coordinator
2045 Morse Rd, Bldg B-2
Columbus, OH  43224
(614) 265-6754  

OKLAHOMA
Oklahoma Water Resources Board
NFIP State Coordinator
3800 N. Classen Boulevard
Oklahoma City, OK  73118
(918) 581-2924  

OREGON
Oregon Department of Land 
Conservation & Development
NFIP State Coordinator
635 Capitol Street, NE, Suite 150
Salem, OR  97301-2540
(503) 373-0050, ext. 250

PENNSYLVANIA
Pennsylvania Department of 
Community and Economic 
Development
Floodplain Management Division
NFIP State Coordinator
400 N Street, 4th Floor
Harrisburg, PA  17120
(717) 720-7445   

PUERTO RICO
Puerto Rico Planning Board
NFIP Coordinator
Minillas Government Center
P.O. Box 41119
Santurce, PR  00940-1119
(787) 723-6200  

RHODE ISLAND
Rhode Island Emergency Management 
Agency, MURI
NFIP State Coordinator
645 New London Avenue
Cranston, RI  02920
(401) 949-9996  

SOUTH CAROLINA
South Carolina Department of Natural 
Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
1000 Assembly Street, Room 345C
Columbia, SC  29201
(803) 734-9120 

SOUTH DAKOTA
South Dakota Division of Emergency 
Management
NFIP State Coordinator
118 W Capitol Avenue
Pierre, SD  57501
(605) 773-3238   

TENNESSEE
Tennessee Department of Economic & 
Community Development
NFIP State Coordinator
312 8th Avenue, 10th Floor
Nashville, TN  37243-0405
(615) 741-2211 

TEXAS
Texas Commission of Environmental 
Quality
NFIP State Coordinator
P.O. Box 13087-MC 160
Austin, TX  78711-3087
(512) 239-6155  

U.S. VIRGIN ISLANDS
Virgin Islands Department of Planning 
& Natural Resources
NFIP Coordinator
CE King Airport, Terminal Bldg 2nd 
St. Thomas, VI  00802
(340) 774-3320  

UTAH
Utah Division of Comprehensive 
Emergency Management
NFIP State Coordinator
State Office Building, #1110
Salt Lake City, UT  84114
(801) 538-3750   

VERMONT
Vermont Agency of Natural Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
1229 Portland St Ste 201
St. Johnsburg, VT  05819
(802) 751-0129   

VIRGINIA
Virginia Department of Conservation & 
Recreation
NFIP State Coordinator
203 Governor Street, Suite 206
Richmond, VA  23219-2019
(804) 786-3914   

WASHINGTON
Washington Department of Ecology
Land Resources Program
NFIP State Coordinator
P.O. Box 47600
Olympia, WA  98504-7600
(360) 407-6796   

WEST VIRGINIA
West Virginia Office of Emergency 
Services
NFIP State Coordinator
1900 Kanawha Boulevard, Room EB-80 
Charleston, WV  25305-0360
(304) 965-2331   

WISCONSIN
Wisconsin Department of Natural 
Resources
NFIP State Coordinator
101 S. Webster
Madison, WI  53702
(608) 266-8039  

WYOMING
Wyoming Emergency Management 
Agency
NFIP State Coordinator
122 West 25th Street
Cheyenne, WY  82002
(307) 777-4910 



