   Federal Register / Vol. 58, No. 3 / Wednesday, January 6, 1993
   / Rules and Regulations
   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
   Food and Drug Administration
   
   
   21 CFR Part 101
   
   [Docket No. 91N - 0094]
   RIN 0905 - AB67
   
   
   Food Labeling: Health Claims; Calcium and Osteoporosis
   
   AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.
   
   ACTION: Final rule.
   
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                                       
   
   
   SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing
   its decision to authorize the use on the label and labeling of
   foods of health claims relating to an association between
   adequate calcium intake and osteoporosis. These rules are
   issued in response to provisions of the Nutrition Labeling and
   Education Act of 1990 (the 1990 amendments) that bear on
   health claims and are developed in accordance with the general
   requirements in the health claims rule published elsewhere in
   this issue of the Federal Register. The agency has concluded
   that, based on the totality of the scientific evidence, there
   is significant scientific evidence and agreement among
   qualified experts that maintaining a diet adequate in calcium
   has a significant impact on bone health particularly during
   the critical bone forming years and after menopause and may
   help to reduce the risk of osteoporosis. The agency has
   therefore concluded that claims on foods relating the calcium
   content to a reduced risk ofosteoporosis in susceptible
   populations are justified.
   
   EFFECTIVE DATE: May 8, 1993.
   
   FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Mona S. Calvo, Center for
   Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFF - 265), Food and Drug
   Administration, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 202 - 205
   - 5434.
   
   SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
   
   I. Background
   
       In the Federal Register of November 27, 1991 (56 FR
   60689), the agency proposed to authorize the use on foods,
   including dietary supplements, of health claims relating to
   the association between calcium and risk of osteoporosis. The
   proposed rule was issued in response to provisions of the 1990
   amendments (Pub. L. 101 - 535) that bear on health claims and
   in accordance with the proposed general requirements for
   health claims for food (56 FR 60537). With respect to health
   claims, the 1990 amendments amend the Federal Food, Drug, and
   Cosmetic Act (the act) by adding a new provision (section
   403(r)(1)(B) (21 U.S.C. 343(r)(1)(B)) that provides that a
   product is misbranded if it bears a claim that characterizes
   the relationship of a nutrient to a disease or health-related
   condition unless the claim is made in accordance with section
   403(r)(3) or (r)(5)(D) of the act.
       Section 3(b)(1)(A) of the 1990 amendments specifically
   requires that the agency determine whether 10 nutrient/disease
   relationships meet the requirements of the section 403(r)(3)
   or (r)(5)(D) of the act. The relationship of calcium and
   osteoporosiswas one of these areas. FDA published a notice in
   the Federal Register of March 28, 1991 (56 FR 12932),
   requesting scientific data and information on the 10 specific
   topic areas identified. Relevant scientific studies and data
   received in response to this request were considered as part
   of the agency's review of the scientific literature on calcium
   and osteoporosis and were included in the proposed rule (56 FR
   60689). Because of time constraints, FDA addressed in that
   proposal only those comments submitted in response to the
   March 28,1991, notice that were in the form of scientific
   data. Comments of a more specific nature were not responded to
   at that time and are included among the comments responded to
   below.
       Provisions of the proposed rule included qualifying and
   disqualifying criteria for the purpose of identifying foods
   eligible to bear a health claim. The proposal also specified
   mandatory content and label information for health claims
   statements and provided a model health claim and consumer
   summary statement. FDA also discussed potential safety issues
   relating to overfortification or oversupplementation with
   calcium. FDA requested written comments on the proposed rule,
   including comments on the issue of how to assess calcium
   bioavailability in products (conventional foods and
   supplements) to justify their eligibility to bear a health
   claim. Moreover, to ensure that calcium and osteoporosis
   claims will not mislead those individuals within thepopulation
   for whom relatively higher calcium intake over a lifetime
   offers no apparent benefit to their bone health, FDA proposed
   that the subpopulations clearly at risk be identified on the
   label and solicited comments on how best to convey this
   information.
   
   II. Summary of Comments and the Agency's Responses
   
       In response to the proposed rule, the agency received more
   than 100 letters, each containing one or more comments, from
   consumers, consumer organizations, health care professionals,
   professional organizations, State and local governments,
   foreign governments, trade associations, and industry. In
   addition to these comments, the agency also considered
   statements made in a public hearing held on January 30 and 31,
   1992 (57 FR 239, January 3, 1992) on a number of food labeling
   issues, including the proposed requirements for health claims.
   Some of the comments agreed with one or more provisions of the
   proposed rules without providing grounds for support other
   than those provided by FDA in the preamble to the proposal.
   Other comments disagreed with one or more provisions of the
   proposed rule without providing specific grounds for the
   disagreement. A few comments addressed issues outside of the
   scope of the regulations. Most of the comments provided
   specific support for their positions on the propos
       Before issuing the proposal, FDA contracted with the Life
   Sciences Research Office (LSRO) of the Federation of American
   Societies for Experimental Biology to evaluate independently
   the scientific literature on dietary calcium and osteoporosis.
   The preliminary draft of the LSRO report, ``Calcium and
   Osteoporosis'' (Ref. 13), was one of the authoritative
   documents reviewed by FDA in developing its proposal. After
   the proposal was issued, LSRO completed its evaluation of the
   scientific literature and submitted its final report in
   February 1992. The agency placed a copy of the final report in
   the administrative file (Ref. 138), and has considered the
   report as a comment on the proposal.
   
   A. Validity Issues
   
       1. No comments disputed FDA's tentative conclusion that a
   lifetime of adequate calcium intake is important for
   maintenance of bone health and may help reduce the risk of
   osteoporosis, particularly for individuals at greatest risk.
   Most comments supported the agency's position.
       The LSRO report (Ref. 138) concluded that ``the weight of
   the evidence supports the hypothesized relationship between
   calcium intake and bone health as expressed both in increased
   bone mass and in reduced fracture risk.'' According to LSRO,
   ``the focus of calcium as a nutrient related to osteoporosis
   lies in its importance both for achieving genetically
   programmed bone mass during about the first 30 to 35 years of
   life and in maintaining that bone during the remaining years
   of life.'' The report stressed that osteoporosis is a
   multifactorial disorder, and that inadequate calcium intake is
   only one of several interacting factors that determine whether
   low-trauma fracture will occur. The report also noted that
   ``the data concerning level of [calcium] intake required for
   bone health can be safely generalized only to Caucasian
   females.''
       FDA acknowledges the significant agreement on this matter
   and reconfirms its position that adequate calcium intake is
   important for maintenance of bone health and may help reduce
   the risk of osteoporosis, particularly for individuals at
   greatest risk. FDA notes that the LSRO report is consistent
   with required health claim statements about the mechanism by
   which calcium works (proposed 101.72(d)(3), finalized at
   101.72(c)(2)(i)(C)) and the population at greatest risk
   (101.72(c)(2)(i)(B)). As discussed in the proposal (56 FR at
   60698), FDA agrees that the general population is not at
   significant risk of developing osteoporosis. For example,
   despite their generally lower calcium intake, data show that
   African Americans have higher bonemass at maturity and a very
   low incidence of osteoporosis-related bone fracture.
   
   B. Advisability of Permitting Claims
   
       2. One comment asserted that health claims pertaining to
   calcium and osteoporosis should not be permitted because (1)
   the target population for the claim is too small, and (2)
   older people with the condition may be misled into thinking
   the rate of bone loss will be slowed or reversed with
   increased calcium consumption.
       FDA disagrees with this comment, which provided no support
   for its assertions. First, a large number of American women
   are at risk of developing osteoporosis (Ref. 18). Further,
   many of the elderly have low bone mass, and they continue to
   lose bone mass with further aging. These individuals will
   clearly benefit from information about how they may reduce
   their risk of the disease.
       Secondly, as explained fully in the preamble of the
   proposal (56 FR at 60689), adequate calcium intake does help
   to slow the rate of bone loss in the elderly. Thus, while
   under 101.72, claims may not imply that adequate calcium
   intake will reverse bone loss, under 101.72 (c)(2)(i)(C),
   when reference is made to persons with a family history of the
   disease, menopausal women, and elderly men and women, the
   claim may state that adequate calcium intake is linked to
   reduced risk of osteoporosis thwill mislead the elderly.
       3. A few comments argued that a health claim should not be
   allowed because delay of the onset of osteoporotic fracture is
   not exclusively associated with adequate calcium intake. One
   of the comments justified this assertion by stating that many
   essential nutrients in addition to calcium, such as magnesium,
   copper, zinc, fluoride, and vitamins A, D, K, and C, are
   needed for normal bone growth and development.
       FDA recognizes that many nutrients are essential for
   normal bone growth and development. However, FDA disagrees
   that this fact should preclude the agency from permitting a
   health claim pertaining to calcium and osteoporosis. The
   requirement in 101.72(c)(2)(i)(A) that claims advise
   consumers of the importance of healthful diets is intended to
   alert consumers to the need to consume essential nutrients in
   addition to calcium. As the agency explained fully in the
   proposal (56 FR at 60689), national food intake surveys (Refs.
   35, 54, and 105) provide evidence identifying calcium from
   dietary sources as a problem nutrient in a subpopulation at
   risk for osteoporosis, namely women between 11 and 35 years of
   age. Furthermore, FDA has concluded thatbased on the totality
   of the scientific evidence, there is significant scientific
   agreement among qualified experts that the evidence
   overwhelmingly supports the significance of calcium in
   maintaining bone health. Thus, FDA believes that the
   populationat greatest risk of osteoporotic fracture in later
   life should be advised through food labeling of the benefits
   of adequate calcium intake.
   
   C. Clarity of Provisions
   
       4. A number of comments on the proposed rule on general
   requirements for health claims (November 27, 1991, 56 FR
   60537) suggested that FDA revise provisions of all health
   claims rules to be more understandable.
       FDA agrees that its regulations should be understandable.
   FDA has therefore made several nonsubstantive revisions in
   101.72 for the sake of clarity. For example, the provisions
   of the regulation have been grouped into general and specific
   requirements. The general requirements reference other
   regulations containing nutrition labeling requirements. The
   specific requirements are separated into requirements
   pertaining to the food and those pertaining to the claim.
   Finally, the model health claims have been simplified.
   
   D. Qualifying Levels
   
       5. A few comments addressed the issue of an appropriate
   qualifying level for calcium in a food. All of the comments
   strongly supported the requirement that a food bearing a
   calcium-osteoporosis claim be ``high'' in calcium (i.e.,
   contain a minimumof 20 percent of the reference daily intake
   (RDI)). A number of the comments, however, asserted that the
   RDI was being set too low. One comment stated that the
   proposed RDI for calcium (900 mg) was an inadequate intake
   guideline for those individuals at greatest risk of
   osteoporosis. Another comment argued that there is substantial
   evidence that the population-weighted means used to establish
   the RDI's may seriously understate the nutritional needs of an
   estimated 52 million Americans.
       For reasons explained fully in the preamble of the final
   rule on Reference Daily Intake and Daily Reference Values,
   which is published elsewhere in this issue of the Federal
   Register, FDA has adopted an RDI for calcium of 1,000 mg, the
   level in current 101.9(c)(7)(iv). In view of the support for
   the proposal that only foods ``high'' in calcium qualify for
   calcium-osteoporosis claim, the agency has retained this
   requirement in the final rule in 101.72(c)(2)(ii)(A)
   (proposed as 101.72(c)(2)) with minor editorial revisions.
   Because the RDI for calcium is 1,000 mg, the reference amount
   customarily consumed for a food would need to contain at least
   200 mg of calcium for it to qualify to bear the authorized
   calcium/ osteoporosis health
   
   E. Assimilability
   
       All comments on this topic generally supported the concept
   of a requirement that the calcium content of the product be
   assimilable (proposed as 101.72(c)(3) and finalized as
   101.72(c)(2)(ii)(B)). In response to an agency request in the
   proposal for comments about how to assess calcium
   assimilability (also referred to as ``bioavailability''), a
   few comments suggested mechanisms to assess calcium
   bioavailability.
       6. Several comments suggested that the agency establish a
   minimum standard that relates bioavailability to the amount of
   calcium actually absorbed from food. One comment cited the
   existence of a recognized data base describing the absorption
   of naturally occurring supplemental and fortified calcium in
   foods. However, the comment added that the cited data base was
   actually a bibliography of various published articles
   describing calcium absorption from a variety of food sources.
   Another comment offered the following suggestion: ``FDA should
   estimate the quantity of calcium in various foods that is
   rendered unavailable by oxalic acid, phytate, fiber, or other
   constituents and subtract this unavailable calcium from the
   amount of available calciumthat the food would be expected to
   supply (which is usually only about half of the reported
   calcium content of food).'' The comment suggested that FDA
   should not allow health claims on a given food if, after
   adjustment for oxalate and other constituents, the estimated
   quantity of ``available'' calcium is markedly lower than
   ordinarily expected, given the food reported calcium content.
   Similarly, another comment proposed the use of the indirect
   method of calciuric response to a calcium load as a convenient
   and reliable method of testing calcium absorbability and also
   proposed a test based on radiocalcium absorption.
       FDA acknowledges these useful suggestions but notes that
   none of the proposed methods assesses calcium utilization. As
   discussed in the proposal, calcium bioavailability means both
   absorption and tissue utilization of calcium (56 FR at 60699).
   Appropriate tests for bioavailability need to include a
   measurement of the utilization of calcium by bone (calcium
   retention). A product that contains components that increase
   the urinary or fecal excretion of calcium or somehow impair
   the utilization of calcium by bone will not qualify for a
   calcium-osteoporosis claim. Monitoring only factors that alter
   absorption, such as the phytate content of a food, as
   suggested in the comment, would not allow estimation of the
   effects of factors that promote obligatory calcium loss such
   as increased urinary loss due to a high sulfate content. Both
   increased excretion and impaired utilization cause the
   decreased deposition of calcium in bone.
       7. Some comments requested that FDA clarify an acceptable
   level of ``assimilability,'' such as an acceptable percent
   bioavailability. The comments asserted that it would be
   unrealistic to require bioavailability data on all foods
   bearing a calcium claim, but that such a requirement might be
   a logical prerequisite for new sources of calcium used to
   fortify foods. A number of comments suggested that food and
   supplement manufacturers should bear the burden of proof of
   the bioavailability of calcium-fortified products and
   supplements in order to avoid indiscriminate fortification and
   marketing of poorly bioavailable supplements.
       FDA reiterates that a product bearing a
   calcium-osteoporosis health claim must contain calcium that
   can be assimilated by the body. As noted in the proposal, it
   would be misleading to put a health claim for a substance on a
   food if consumption of that food will not provide the
   substance (56 FR at 60699). Such a food would be misbranded
   under section 403 (a) of the act (21 U.S.C. 343(a)). Given
   that most currently marketed products that are likely to bear
   a calcium-osteoporosis claim contain bioavailable calcium, FDA
   does not consider it necessary at this time to set a minimum
   acceptable level of bioavailability. If a food bearing a
   calcium osteoporosis claim does not contain calcium in a
   bioavailable form, the Government can take enforcement undeer.
   Calcium sources whose bioavailability has not been
   demonstrated would be at risk for such enforcement action.
       There are sufficient scientific data in published
   literature to support the bioavailability of many sources of
   calcium in current use. However, instances may develop in
   which the bioavailability of the calcium source has not been
   shown, including the use of new fortificants or food products
   in which the combination of the component nutrients raises
   concerns about the assimilability of calcium from the product
   (e.g., a new bread rich in a novel high phytate fiber source
   and fortified with calcium).
       As discussed in the previous comment, there are various
   ways of testing for bioavailability. FDA considers human or
   growing animal models to provide the most accurate
   assessments. One approach would involve collection of human
   data from calcium balance studies using stable isotopes or
   radioisotopes as evidence of reasonable or adequate
   bioavailability (assimilability), as well as evidence from
   well-controlled calcium supplementation or dietary
   intervention studies that measure calcium absorption and bone
   mass or density change over time. An appropriate standard
   reference would be calcium carbonate or milk.
       FDA recognizes that establishing calcium retention in
   humans is a difficult and costly procedure. Another approach
   would use a growing animal model (rat) to demonstrate calcium
   retention in bone. Use of the growing rat model offers ease of
   bone mass or mineral content assessment, and, unlike human
   subjects, rats show limited between-subject variation in
   calcium absorption. There are a number of suitable studies in
   the literature that could serve as models and the basis for a
   study design (e.g.,Refs. 139 through 141). The common
   end-measures shared by these animal studies include measures
   of apparent calcium absorption and determination of calcium
   content of bone, either directly by bone ashing and mineral
   analyses (Refs. 139 and 140) or indirectly by densitometric or
   histomorphometric methods (Ref. 141).
       8. A number of comments proposed that superiority claims
   regarding the bioavailability or absorbability of calcium in a
   food or supplement compared to a reference food or supplement
   be permitted. One comment proposed milk as an ideal reference
   food against which to make the proposed comparisons and
   suggested the use of human bioavailability tests to provide
   evidence in support of superiority claims. Several comments
   suggested that a statistically significant difference in
   calcium absorption between two products using the proposed
   techniques should provide the basis for a superior
   absorbability comparative claim.
       FDA advises that it is not appropriate to permit requested
   superiority claims under the provisions of the 1990 amendments
   that govern health claims. To the extent that the 1990
   amendments provide for comparative claims, it is only with
   respect to claims that charaterize the level of a nutrient
   (section 403 (r)(1)(A) of the act). Regulations governing
   nutrient content claims, published elsewhere in this issue of
   the Federal Register, do not provide for superiority claims
   based on bioavailability. However, under 10.30, an interested
   party can petition the agency to provide for superiority
   claims based on bioavailability. In considering such a
   petition, the agency would be concerned about ensuring that
   superiority claims are valid and nutritionally meaningful.
   
   F. Disintegration and Dissolution of Calcium Supplements
   
       9. The majority of comments concerned with the proposed
   requirement that calcium supplements meet the U.S.
   Pharmacopeia (U.S.P.) standards for disintegration and
   dissolution of calcium supplements (in proposed 101.72(c)(4))
   fully supported thisaspect of the proposed regulation. The
   LSRO report strongly supported the proposed requirement noting
   that while the chemical form or solubility of the supplement
   makes little difference, the physical form of the salt and
   formulation of the tablet are cred that ``tablets so poorly
   formulated that they fail to disintegrate under simulated
   gastric conditions appear to be widely distributed in the U.S.
   market.'' A public health advocacy group further suggested
   that since the U.S.P. is currently updating its standards for
   dietary supplements, the revised standards may include
   additional measures that FDA should adopt in the future.1Two
   comments opposed this requirement. One argued that ``the
   United States Pharmacopeia standards are not appropriately
   complete enough to be an exclusive condition for a product's
   health claim eligibility.'' The comment asserted that the
   U.S.P.'s are in vitro standards (meaning conducted in a test
   tube) and might not reflect human bioavailability of an
   individual calcium supplement, and they should therefore only
   establish a disqualifying presumption that would be rebuttable
   by the submission ofhuman data supporting the product's
   bioavailability. Another comment emphasized the lack of
   justification for this testing, the inability to conduct all
   the tests since some of the calcium salts identified as safe
   for use as calcium supplements are notsubject to U.S.P.
   dissolution requirements (calcium sulfate, and calcium oxide),
   the lack of fairness in that foods are not held to these
   criteria, the inappropriate application of drug standards set
   forth in the U.S.P. monographs to supplements, the
   ``questionable expertise'' of the U.S.P. convention members to
   judge nutritional property of compounds, and finally the lack
   of basis to require these standards in order to qualify for a
   health claim.
       FDA has carefully considered these comments and agrees
   with several points. FDA agrees that disintegration and
   dissolution testing methods used to screen calcium supplements
   for bioavailability are imperfect, because these in vitro
   tests do not adequately mimic the physiologic environment of
   the human stomach, and U.S.P. standards are not available for
   all calcium-containing compounds. However, the agency
   considers the U.S.P. standards to provide sufficient assurance
   of dissolution and disintegration for those products where
   U.S.P. standards exist. A supplement that does not dissolve
   and disintegrate clearly does not provide calcium in an
   assimilable form and thus, a claim for such a supplement would
   be misleading because the supplement would not provide the
   nutrient that is the subject of the claim. Calcium supplements
   not in conventional food form can be formulated in a manner
   that prevents rapid dissociation and disintegration in the
   stomach, preventing assimilation. This unique aspect justifies
   the requirement in 101.72(c)(2)(ii)(C) for supplements.
       However, when U.S.P. standards do not exist, the agency
   recognizes, as pointed out by one comment, the need for an
   alternative method of establishing the bioavailability of
   supplements under the conditions of use stated on the product
   label. Demonstration of acceptable bioavailability in human or
   animal studies when conducted under the conditions of use
   stated on the product label (i.e, fed as an intact tablet, not
   crushed) would fulfill the requirement. Section
   101.72(c)(2)(ii)(C) has been revised to require that dietary
   supplements meet the U.S.P. standards for disintegration and
   dissolution, except that dietary supplements for which no
   applicable U.S.P. standards exist shall exhibit appropriate
   assimilability under conditions of use stated on the product
   label. In order for a dietary supplement to bear the
   authorized calcium osteoporosis health claim, it must comply
   with all provisions of this final regulation.
   
   G. Phosphorus Content
   
       For reasons explained fully in the preamble of the
   proposal (56 FR 60689 at 60699 to 60700), FDA proposed that
   high levels of phosphorus (naturally occurring or added) in
   conventional foods or supplements that result in calcium to
   phosphorus ratios lo be eligible to bear a claim was based on
   the ubiquitous distribution of this mineral in the food
   supply, the low ratio of calcium to phosphorus that typifies
   current intake patterns, and current evidence demonstrating
   that high levels of dietary phosphorus coupled with low
   dietary calcium adversely influence hormonal factors that
   regulate calcium and bone metabolism (Refs. 17, 21, 29, 32,
   46, 93, 114, and 116). Many of the comments addressing this
   issue strongly supported the proposed phosphorus provision
   because of the reasons given by FDA in the proposal.
       10. One comment questioned the need for any requirement
   that the phosphorus content not exceed the calcium content,
   asserting that ``any reasonable fortified or enriched product
   will meet this condition.''
       The agency believes that it is incorrect to assume that
   all enriched, fortified, or modified products will contain
   more calcium than phosphorus, or even that products
   traditionally known to be rich sources of calcium will have
   lower levels of phosphorus than calcium. For example, a recent
   article (Ref. 142) on the reduction of fat in a newly
   developed processed cheese showed how processing techniques
   used to lower fat resulted in a calcium to phosphorus ratio
   lower than one to one. Some productsnaturally rich in
   phosphorus cannot meet this condition even after calcium
   fortification, and some products that are traditionally
   recognized as calcium rich foods, such as puddings, are now
   available in convenient instant versions in which the added
   phosphorus content far exceeds the calcium content. Therefore,
   FDA concludes that this comment does not provide a basis not
   to adopt a level of phosphorus that, if found in a food, would
   render the calcium osteoporosis claim misleading.
       11. Several comments were in strong opposition to the
   requirement that a product not contain more phosphorus than
   calcium on a per weight basis. One comment contended that FDA
   relied on erroneous information relative to the consumption
   levels of dietary phosphorus supplied by food additives. The
   comment included data indicating little change in the
   estimated daily consumption of phosphorus from food additives
   from 1980 to 1990, based on the International Food Additives
   Council's estimated disappearance of food grade phosphorus in
   the United States. According to these data, the average per
   capita phosphorus consumption from food additives increased
   from 9.5 to more than 11 percent of the acceptable daily
   intake of phosphorus from 1980 to 1990.
       FDA's statement in the proposal that phosphorus intake may
   be understated by as much as 15 to 20 percent due to
   phosphorus supplied by numerous additives was apparently
   misinterpreted by these comments. The agency did not intend to
   imply that phosphorus-containing food additive consumption had
   increased 15 to 20 percent. Rather, the agency was relying on
   the finding of Oenning et al. (Ref. 106), who demonstrated
   that nutrient estimates calculated from food intake records
   using current nutrient composition data bases underestimated
   phosphorus intake when compared to direct chemical analysis of
   the food from the dietary record. The underestimation of
   phosphorus content demonstrated in this study apparently was
   due to errors in the nutrient data bases, which have not kept
   abreast of changes in manufacturing techniques and in the use
   of phosphorus-containing food additives. FDA made this point
   to emphasize that currently in the United States, total
   phosphorus intake greatly exceeds that of calcium, and that
   the levels may be even higher than surveys suggest because of
   flaws in the nutrient composition data bases used in these
   surveys.
       The agency disagrees with the comment and interprets data
   presented by the comment as evidence of an important increase
   in phosphate food additive use over the last decade. These
   data indicate that estimated per capita daily consumption of
   phosphorusta as compared to an estimated 400 mg of phosphorus
   per day per capita for 1980, or approximately a 17 percent
   increase in per capita use over the last decade. Thus, more
   than one line of evidence points to the fact that the
   consumption of phosphorus-containing additives is on the rise
   and contributes to the high phosphorus intake observed in the
   United States population.
       12. Another comment strongly opposed the proposed limit on
   phosphorus content for a number of reasons. The comment
   asserted that any health claim disqualifier must meet the same
   conditions as the claim itself, such as unanimous agreement
   among experts, and that no studies to date have demonstrated
   an adverse effect of excess phosphorus on bone in man or in
   monkeys or in calcium balance studies. This comment also
   asserted that there is a controversy over the effect of high
   phosphorus on calcium absorption and pointed to the fact that
   no single food contributes to the high phosphorus intake and
   to the remote possibility that reduction of phosphorus intake
   from one food will reduce total phosphorus intake.
       The agency does not agree that any of these points
   warrants modification of the limit on phosphorus content in
   101.72(c)(2)(ii)(D). The limit on phosphorus is not a
   ``disqualifying level'' as that term is defined based on
   section 403(r)(3)(A)(ii) of the act. FDA is not limiting the
   phosphorus content because of its effect on the risk of a
   diet-related disease or health-related condition. FDA may have
   contributed to confusion in this regard by stating in the
   proposal that the level of phosphorus would disqualify a
   product from bearing a claim (56 FR at 60699). FDA is limiting
   the amount of phosphorus under the authority of section 403(a)
   of the act. As explained above, high levels of phosphorus when
   calcium intakes is low, would impair theutilization of calcium
   by bone. Thus, the presence of a calcium/osteoporosis claim on
   a food that does not have an appropriate calcium-phosphorus
   ratio would be misleading, because it would not be possible to
   get the full benefits of calcium from such a food.
       In response to the criticism that no studies have
   demonstrated direct adverse effects of excess phosphorus on
   bone in humans or primate models, the agency points out that
   evidence in humans demonstrates that high levels of dietary
   phosphorus coupledwith low dietary calcium intake adversely
   influence hormonal factors that regulate calcium and bone
   metabolism (Refs. 17, 21, 29, 32, 46, 93, 114, and 116). These
   changes were consistent with those observed in a variety of
   animal models where the hormonal changes were shown to induce
   bone resorption and ultimately bone loss (Ref. 46). The agency
   is particularly concerned about teens and young adults who
   typically consume more phosphorus than calcium (Ref. 105) and
   for whom such diets have recently been shown to produce
   changes in serum calcium and bone-regulating hormones that may
   adversely affect attainment of peak bone mass (Ref. 32). The
   health claim is an effective means of alerting this vulnerable
   population to foods that have the desired ratio of these two
   nutrients. Therefore the agency does not agree with the
   comment's suggestion that the limit on phosphorus content be
   dropped.
       The agency does not disagree with the other assertions
   made in this comment. These points are minor and, given that
   health claims are authorized in the context of the total daily
   diet, not particularly relevant. The agency did not assert
   that excess phosphorus impaired calcium absorption and has
   maintained that phosphorus is ubiquitously distributed in the
   food supply. Given the effects of phosphorus on hormonal
   factors that regulate calcium and bone metabolism, FDA
   concludes that the limit on phosphorus content for a food that
   bears a calcium/osteoporosis claim is appropriate.
   
   H. No Quantification of Reduction in Risk
   
       13. One comment urged FDA to avoid any possible
   misinterpretation and potential abuse of the calcium/
   osteoporosis regulation by specifying in the regulation that
   ``the claim shall not convey the misconception that dietary
   calcium intake can cure osteoporosis.'' The comment included
   examples of labels of dietary supplements found in health food
   stores.
       The agency agrees with the comment's concern but remains
   confident that the claims being authorized will not mislead
   consumers into believing that calcium cures osteoporosis. This
   regulation authorizes a health claim that relates calcium
   intake to a reduction in the risk of osteoporosis. A statement
   that calcium cures osteoporosis would constitute a drug claim
   under section 201(g)(1)(B) of the act (21 U.S.C.
   321(g)(1)(B)), and a product bearing such a claim would be
   subject to regulation as a drug. In addition,
   101.72(c)(2)(i)(D) bars health claims on calcium and
   osteoporosis from attributing any degree of reduction in risk
   of osteoporosis to maintaining an adequate calcium intake
   throughout life.
   
   I. Limitations of Benefit to Bone Health
   
       14. Several comments opposed the upper-limit-of-benefit
   statement proposed in 101.72(d)(5), saying that this
   statement was an effort to limit the potency of supplements. A
   number of comments supported the statement but required that
   it be qualified. One comment requested that the statement only
   be placed on products in which the calcium level is greater
   than 50 percent of the originally proposed RDI of 900 mg or
   450 mg of calcium (presumably per serving or per recommended
   daily dose). This comment reasoned that for products with
   lower levels of calcium, an unreasonable number of servings of
   food would need to be consumed to exceed 200 percent of the
   RDI, and thus the statement was not necessary.
       FDA does not agree with the assertion that it is seeking
   to limit the potency of supplements. This regulation relates
   only to the type of health claim that a product may bear. It
   ensures that a material fact about the consequences of
   consumption of more than a specified level of calcium is
   presented as part of the claim. FDA agrees in principle with
   the suggested change in proposed 101.72(d)(5) and believes
   that this modification may help curb overfortification. The
   agency has therefore addedthe following language to the
   proposed provision redesignated as 101.72(c)(2)(i)(E)):
   ``This requirement does not apply to foods that contain less
   than 40 percent of the recommended daily intake of 1,000 mg of
   calcium per day or 400 mg of calcium per reference amount
   customarily consumed or per total daily recommended supplement
   intake.''
   
   J. Safety
   
       15. A public health advocacy association suggested that
   FDA require labels on high dose calcium supplements to
   disclose that high calcium intakes may increase the risk of
   kidney stones in susceptible people. The comment argued that
   levels greater than 1,000 to 2,500 mg calcium per day may pose
   a risk to people with a history of kidney stones, and that,
   therefore, labels on supplements that contain 500 mg or more
   of calcium should inform consumers of this risk.
       The agency does not agree that a warning is needed in
   addition to the statement on total dietary intakes greater
   than 200 percent of the RDI. Section 101.72(c)(2)(i)(B)
   requires that the health claim identify the populations at
   greatest risk of osteoporosis, namely caucasian and Asian
   women in their bone forming years. Kidney stones are more
   prevalent in men than women. (With respect to calcium oxalate
   or mixed calcium stones, affected males outnumber affected
   females by three or four to one in the U.S. population (Ref.
   143).) Thus, while men are at greater risk of the adverse
   affects of excess calcium intake due to their greater
   susceptibility to kidney stone formation, they are not at
   greater risk for osteoporosis and will not be targetedby the
   calcium-osteoporosis health claim. Consequently, there is no
   reason to expect that men will increase their consumption of
   calcium in response to the claim. Therefore, FDA concludes
   that the regulations offer sufficient protection without the
   prop
   
   K. Consumer Summary
   
       16. The comments specific to the proposed consumer summary
   were generally supportive, and some considered consumer
   summaries necessary to put any health claim into perspective
   as related to total diet. The use of the consumer summary on
   package inserts was suggested by several groups. Several
   comments suggested various ways to shorten the summary, while
   others suggested additional information to incorporate. One
   comment strongly opposed the consumer summary, stating that in
   light of the detailed, balanced information provided in the
   model claims, summaries are redundant, costly, and
   inconvenient to the manufacturer.
       As discussed in the final rule on general requirements for
   health claims, consumer summaries are not required, although
   their use remains an option. For this reason, FDA has not
   included the proposed consumer summary on calcium and
   osteoporosis in this final rule.
   
   L. Regulatory History of Calcium-containing Food Additive Use
   
       The agency advised that, in order for calcium-containing
   food ingredients in conventional foods or calcium supplement
   products to be considered eligible to bear the authorized
   calcium/ osteoporosis health claim, they must meet the
   requirements in öA101.14, which include that they have been
   shown to FDA's satisfaction to be safe and lawful under the
   applicable safety provisions of the act (56 FR at 60699).
   Safety and lawfulness can be demonstrated in a number of ways,
   including through a showing that a food is generally
   recognized as safe (GRAS), affirmed as GRAS by FDA, listed in
   the food additive regulations, or subject to a prior sanction.
   Of the 36 or more calcium-containing ingredients identified by
   the agency as currently in use (Ref. 33), FDA advised that
   only the following 10 compounds had been demonstrated to be
   safe and lawful for use in a dietary supplement or as a
   nutrient supplement: calcium carbonate, calcium citrate,
   calcium glycerophosphate, calcium oxide, calcium
   pantothenate,calcium phosphate, calcium pyrophosphate, calcium
   chloride, calcium lactate, and calcium sulfate (56 FR at
   60691).
       17. One comment pointed out that the agency failed to
   include calcium ascorbate in this list of 10 compounds. The
   comment included also submitted an April 1989 letter from FDA
   stating the agency's lack of objection to the use of calcium
   ascorbatein dietary supplements. Another comment sought the
   addition of calcium hydroxide to the list of 10 calcium
   compounds discussed above, contending that ``since calcium
   oxide is permitted and calcium hydroxide is simply the hydrate
   of the oxide formed on contact with water,'' calcium hydroxide
   should be included in the list.
       As stated above, only 10 compounds have been demonstrated
   to FDA's satisfaction to be safe and lawful for use in a
   dietary supplement or as a nutrient supplement bearing a
   calcium/ osteoporosis health claim. In Ref. 33 of the
   proposal, the agency identified the calcium-containing
   ingredients currently in use, their functions, conditions of
   use, and limits on the levels at which they can be added to
   food. Only those ingredients with stated use as a nutrient
   supplement or in a dietary supplement are considered eligible
   for a health claim. Calcium ascorbate appears only under 21
   CFR 182.3189 (Ref. 33) for use as a chemical preservative.
   Thus, FDA's failure to list it was not inadvertent. Calcium
   ascorbate is not eligible at this time for consideration for a
   health claim; however, a petition may be filed requesting a
   safety review for a new use of calcium ascorbate. Based on the
   outcome of this petition and review, calcium ascorbate may be
   considered eligible for a calcium/ osteoporosis health claim.
       The agency declines to add calcium hydroxide to the list
   of 10 calcium-containing compounds that have been demonstrated
   to be safe and lawful for use in a dietary or nutrient
   supplement. In the list, FDA identified those ingredients with
   stated uses to include calcium hydroxide on the list does not
   imply that the agency considers the use of this substance to
   be unsafe for use as a calcium supplement, but rather reflects
   that it has not been demonstrated safe and lawful for this
   use. Manufacturerswho would like to be abel to make a calcium/
   osteoporosis health claim based on the presence of calcium
   hydroxide in their product should submit an appropriate
   petition to FDA.
   
   M. Food Fortification
   
       18. A public health and nutrition association expressed
   concern that manufacturers seeking a calcium/ osteoporosis
   health claim will fortify products of low nutritional value
   that do not naturally contain calcium. The comment recommended
   that FDA consider setting standards for the amount of
   fortification that is allowed and also suggested that FDA
   determine which products can be fortified.
       Although the agency understands the concern expressed in
   the comment, the full implementation of these suggestions is
   beyond the scope of this rulemaking. The agency advises that
   fortification of foods to qualify for a health claim must
   comply withthe final rule on general requirements for health
   claims published elsewhere in this issue of the Federal
   Register.
   
   N. Nutrition Claims
   
       19. One comment argued that claims relating to a
   nutrient's effect on the structure or function of the body are
   not health claims but nutrition claims. The comment suggested
   amending the proposed regulations to clarify the distinction
   between nutrition and health claims. In the event that FDA's
   rejected this proposal, the comment asked that the agency
   acknowledge that the relationship between calcium and bone
   health is a nutrition claim that is substantiated in the
   proposed calcium/ osteoporosishealth claim regulation.
       FDA rejects these suggestions. The distinction between
   nutritional guidance and health claims is discussed in the
   final rule on general requirements for health claims. The
   claim authorized under this regulation relating calcium and
   osteoporosis isa health claim because it characterizes the
   relationship of a nutrient (calcium) to a disease or
   health-related condition (osteoporosis). A claim relating
   calcium to bone health would have to be evaluated on its own
   merits. Such a claim might be considered an implied health
   claim, rather than merely a statement about a food's effect on
   the structure or function of the body, and, if so, it would be
   subject to regulation under section 403(r) of the act.
   
   O. Model Claim
   
       20. Many comments discussed the length of the model health
   claim and its required components. Common to all comments was
   the complaint that the model message was too wordy. Comments
   were almost equally split between those supporting and those
   opposing the proposed model message. Supporting comments
   praised specific aspects of the model claim such as disclosure
   of other risk factors; the likely upper limit of beneficial
   calcium intakes; reflection of other factors that contribute
   to osteoporosisrisk such as age, race, and sex; inclusion of
   the need for exercise; and disclosure of the mechanisms
   through which calcium may reduce the risk of osteoporosis.
   Opposing comments emphasized the burdensome length of the
   model claim. One comment stated that the length of the claim
   would not allow it to be translated into multiple languages on
   the label. Many comments requested that FDA remove the
   requirements that populations at special risk of osteoporosis
   and nondietary factors that can help preventosteoporosis be
   identified. Several comments suggested that the length of the
   claim will limit its effectiveness and curtail manufacturers'
   incentives to make claims. An association of national
   advertisers asserted that no diet and disease relationship can
   be explained completely in one paragraph.
       The agency agrees that the proposed model health claim was
   too long. However, as discussed in the proposal and elsewhere
   in this final rule, certain information is needed in the
   health claim in order for it to be truthful and not misleading
   to segments of the population that are not at high risk of
   developing osteoporosis or for whom no link between calcium
   and osteoporosis has been established. FDA notes that the
   proposed model claim contained optional as well as required
   information, and the example has been rewritten to demonstrate
   that all required information can be included in a model claim
   of less than 35 words: ``Regular exercise and eating a
   healthful diet with enough calcium helps teen and young adult
   white and Asian women maintain good bone health and may reduce
   their high risk of osteoporosis later in life.'' Foods that
   contain less than 40 percent of the recommended daily intake
   of 1,000 mg of calcium per day (400 mg calcium) per reference
   amount customarily consumed or per total daily recommended
   supplement intake may bear this claim. Other foods that
   contain higher levels of calcium must also carry an additional
   statement (see 101.72(c)(2)(i)(E)) .
       Throughout FDA's responses to the comments in this
   preamble, the agency has presented various reasons that
   strongly support maintaining the requirements that make the
   claim lengthy. These points include the need not to mislead
   the public in thinking everyone is at risk for this disease,
   the need to identify those at greatest risk and thus to help
   individuals who are not at risk but who are susceptible to the
   adverse effects of oversupplementation with calcium avoid any
   problems, and the need to target the age group for which
   adequate calcium intake may have the greatest benefit for bone
   health and delayed risk of osteoporotic fracture.
   
   P. Other Issues
   
       21. One comment contended that FDA should permit health
   claims on OTC antacid products containing only calcium
   carbonate. Responding to a discussion on dual labeling in the
   proposal on general requirements for health claims (56 FR
   60537), the comment asserted that FDA's objection to OTC drugs
   bearing health claims is not appropriate in the case of
   calcium-based antacids, because such products have been
   labeled for years with both food and drug labeling.
       FDA has addressed the issues raised by this comment in the
   final rule on general requirements for health claims,
   published elsewhere in this issue of the Federal Register.
       22. Another comment urged that the regulation require
   disclosure about the relationship between calcium and protein
   and suggested disqualifying high protein products based on the
   effect of dietary protein on the urinary loss of calcium,
   which affects bone health.
       As mentioned in the preamble of the proposal (56 FR at
   60699), the agency recognizes that high levels of dietary
   protein typically found in the American diet have been shown
   to increase the obligatory loss of calcium, i.e., the amount
   of calcium that the body must lose daily. The agency, however,
   did not propose to disqualify high-protein products from
   bearing a calcium/ osteoporosis claim or to disclose the
   effect of high protein intake on calcium retention on the
   label. Like calcium, protein isnot ubiquitously distributed in
   our food supply and is richest in specific food sources (Refs.
   27 and 110). Relatively few foods are sources of calcium and
   protein, forcing consumers to be selective to meet the
   nutritional needs for both calcium and protein. Some protein
   rich foods, such as lowfat milk or lowfat milk products,
   contribute more than half the calcium and protein intake of
   some individuals, notably children. It would be misleading to
   the public not to allow an important food such as lowfat milk
   to have a calcium/ osteoporosis claim due to its high levels
   of protein. To disqualify a product that is both rich in
   calcium and protein, and that would not be disqualified
   because of its fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, or sodium
   levels, because of its protein content, would effectively
   prevent several major food sources of calcium from bearing a
   claim.
       Several other considerations reinforce the agency's
   position that protein content should not be a basis for
   disqualification from bearing a calcium/osteoporosis claim or
   for a disclosure statement. The scientific evidence
   demonstrating a persistentincrease in the urinary loss of
   calcium when high protein intakes are sustained for months is
   weak and controversial. In addition, different protein sources
   have been shown to elicit varying degrees of calciuria
   (increased loss of calcium in urine), thus making it incorrect
   for the agency to consider all dietary protein sources equally
   potent in their calciuric effect. Moreover, no clear evidence
   exists demonstrating that high protein intake alters any of
   the hormones that control bone formation andresorption, or
   that high protein intake impairs bone mineralization.
       FDA is making several minor changes in the regulation to
   improve its readibility and to make it consistent with other
   regulations that FDA is adopting that authorize health claims.
   The most significant of these changes is the fact that FDA is
   adding to the paragraph on optional information a provision
   that will allow the declaration as part of the claim of the
   number of people who are affected by osteoporous
   (101.72(d)(2)). This change makes 101.72 consistent with the
   other regulations inSubpart E. Therefore, FDA is rejecting the
   comment's suggestion to require a statement about the
   relationship between calcium and protein or to establish a
   level of protein that would disqualify a product from bearing
   a calcium/osteoporosis claim. Theagency concludes that a
   product high in protein can still be an important source of
   calcium and that it cannot conclude that a claim would be
   misleading if it fails to reveal the relationship between
   calcium and protein.
   
   III. Review of Scientific Evidence
   
       FDA updated its review of the scientific literature by
   examining articles published since the proposed rule was
   issued. FDA's evaluation of recent human studies meeting the
   criteria outlined in the proposal (56 FR at 60693) is
   presented in Table 1 (Refs. 144 through 150). In addition, FDA
   also considered several review articles that were published
   since the proposal (Refs. 151 through 156). FDA sought to
   answer the same questions posed in the proposed rule.
       First, do any of the recent studies present evidence
   documenting the role of calcium in achieving peak bone mass? A
   cross-sectional study examining spinal bone density in
   Caucasian girls 8 to 18 years of age demonstrated that calcium
   intake may be a major factor in achieving peak adult bone
   density (Ref. 148). Chan et al. (Ref. 145) also demonstrated
   higher bone mineral content in Caucasian boys and girls
   consuming greater than 1,000 mg of calcium per day. In this
   study 70 percent of the subjects younger than 11 years
   consumed at least their RDA of 800 mg of calcium per day,
   while 63 percent of the subjects older than 11 consumed less
   than their RDA of 1,200 mg per day. After adjustment for
   phosphorus and protein intake, multivariate analyses showed
   only calcium intake was related to bone mineral status of the
   children in this study. Thus, the most recent data, although
   not definitive, continue to strongly support the link between
   adequate calcium intake and optimal peak bone mass.
       The second question asked in reviewing these studies is
   whether added calcium or high calcium intake reduces the risk
   of fracture or slows the rate of bone loss in younger or older
   subjects. Andon et al. (Ref. 144) showed, in a cross-sectional
   study, that Caucasian postmenopausal women consuming less than
   600 mg calcium per day had significantly lower spinal bone
   mineral densities than women with higher calcium intakes.
   Because individuals who malabsorb lactose normally avoid dairy
   products, Wheadon et al. (Ref. 150) assessed lactose
   absorption and dietary calcium intake in elderly women with
   and without hip fractures and in young women. While 60 percent
   of the women with hip fractures were lactose malabsorbers,
   dietary calcium intakes did not disince the aversion to milk
   and milk products ascribed to lactose intolerance may be shown
   to decrease calcium intake in a larger population.
       As discussed in the earlier literature review, the
   responsiveness of postmenopausal women to calcium
   supplementation depends largely on their menopausal age.
   Calcium supplementation had no effect on spinal bone density
   early in menopause, but for women late in menopause, the rate
   of bone loss could be significantly reduced with calcium
   supplementation, if initial habitual calcium intakes were low
   (Refs. 47 and 151). Three recent prospective intervention
   studies ( Refs. 146, 147, and 149) shed further light on this
   observation. Elders et al. (Ref 146) reported a high rate of
   lumbar vertebral bone loss in late and early postmenopausal
   subjects, with the highest loss occurring in early
   postmenopause. However, no significant interaction was
   observed between menopausal status of the subjects and the
   effect of calcium supplementation. These authors reported a
   significant decrease in lumbar bone loss after 2 years for
   women treated daily with 1,000 mg and 2,000 mg of elemental
   calcium relative to controls. The effect of calcium
   supplementation was significant after the first year of
   supplementation but not after the second year. The authors
   speculate that calcium supplementation probably reduced bone
   turnover.
       In a double-blind, placebo controlled trial in Caucasian,
   postmenopausal women, with low initial forearm bone density,
   Prince et al. (Ref. 147) showed significantly less bone loss
   in the distal forearm in those women treated with calcium and
   regularexercise, while a group treated with estrogen and
   regular exercise gained significant bone density at this site
   relative to the control group with normal initial bone density
   and the group treated with exercise alone. Thus, calcium
   supplementation andexercise slowed bone loss relative to
   exercise alone but less effectively than exercise combined
   with estrogen.
       In the third prospective study, this one a 3-year study in
   622 Caucasian women, Tilyard and co-workers measured rate of
   vertebral fractures in women treated twice a day with either
   0.25 micrograms of calcitriol (a synthetic form of the active
   metabolite of vitamin D) or 1 gram of elemental calcium (Ref.
   149). After 2 and 3 years, a significant reduction in the rate
   of vertebral fracture was observed in calcitriol-treated women
   relative to those treated with calcium alone. This study
   clearly demonstrates that supplementation of calcium intake
   alone is not adequate to prevent vertebral fracture in
   postmenopausal women. In the absence of placebo-treated
   controls, the contribution of calcium supplementation to the
   reduction in vertebral fracture cannot be estimated. The
   results of these three prospective clinical trials support the
   hypothesis that adequate calcium intake helps to slow the rate
   of bone loss in postmenopausal women, but that calcium alone
   cannot effectively arrest this process, especially in early
   postmenopause.
       The third question considered in evaluating the recent
   literature was whether any of the studies showed a threshold
   effect for the level of calcium intake associated with changes
   in bone mass. None of the findings from the recent studies
   were pertinent to this question.
       To summarize, these new findings were consistent with and
   strengthened the conclusion that adequate calcium intake has a
   significant impact on bone health and risk of osteoporotic
   fracture.
   
   IV. Decision to Authorize a Health Claim Relating Adequate
   Calcium Intake to Osteoporosis
   
       The agency has reviewed recently published research
   articles and review articles relevant to calcium intake and
   osteoporosis (Refs. 144 through 156) and has concluded that
   the new studies are consistent with the tentative conclusions
   drawn in its propty of publicly available evidence supports an
   association between adequate calcium intake and risk of
   osteoporosis. Based on the totality of the publicly available
   scientific evidence, FDA has determined that there is
   significant scientific agreement among qualified experts that
   a health claim for calcium and osteoporosis is supported by
   the evidence. Under 101.72, an authorized health claim will
   convey the message that an adequate intake of calcium
   throughout life may delay the development of osteoporosis and
   ultimately reduce the risk of bone fracture in some
   individuals later in life.
   
   V. Environmental Impact
   
       The agency has determined that under 21 CFR 25.24(a)(11)
   this action is of a type that does not individually or
   cumulatively have significant effect on the human environment.
   Therefore, neither an environmental assessment nor an
   environmental impact statement is required.
   
   VI. Economic Impact
   
       In its food labeling proposals of November 27, 1991 (56 FR
   60366 et seq.), FDA stated that the food labeling reform
   initiative, taken as a whole, would have associated costs in
   excess of the $100 million threshold that defines a major
   rule. Thus, in accordance with Executive Order 12291 and the
   Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96 - 354), FDA developed
   one comprehensive regulatory impact analysis (RIA) that
   presented the costs and benefits of all of the food labeling
   provisions taken together. That RIA was published in the
   Federal Register of November 27, 1991 (56 FR 60856), and along
   with the food labeling proposals, the agency requested
   comments on the RIA.
       FDA has evaluated more than 300 comments that it received
   in response to the November 1991 RIA. FDA's discussion of
   these comments is contained in the agency's final RIA
   published elsewhere in this issue of the Federal Register. In
   addition,FDA will prepare a final regulatory flexibility
   analysis (RFA) subsequent to the publication of the food
   labeling final rules. The final RFA will be placed on file
   with the Dockets Management Branch (HFA - 305), Food and Drug
   Administration, rm. 1 - 23, 12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD
   20857, and a notice will be published in the Federal Register
   announcing its availability.
       In the final RIA, FDA has concluded, based on its review
   of available data and comments, that the overall food labeling
   reform initiative constitutes a major rule as defined by
   Executive Order 12291. Further, the agency has concluded that
   althoughthe costs of complying with the new food labeling
   requirements are substantial, such costs are outweighed by the
   public health benefits that will be realized through the use
   of improved nutrition information provided by food labeling.
   
   VII. References
   
       The following references have been placed on display in
   the Dockets Management Branch (address above) and may be seen
   by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday
   through Friday.
       1. DHHS, Public Health Service, ``The Surgeon General's
   Report on Nutrition and Health,'' Washington, DC, DHHS (PHS)
   Publication No. 017 - 001 - 00465 - 1, U.S. Government
   Printing Office, 1988.
       2. Committee on Diet and Health, Commission on Life
   Sciences, National Research Council, ``Diet and Health:
   Implications for Reducing Chronic Disease Risk,'' Washington,
   DC, National Academy Press, 1989.
       3. Food and Nutrition Board, Commission on Life Sciences,
   National Research Council, ``Recommended Dietary Allowances,''
   Tenth Edition, Washington, DC, National Academy Press, 1989.
       4. USDA and DHHS, ``Nutrition and Your Health: Dietary
   Guidelines for Americans,'' Home and Garden Bulletin, No. 232,
   U.S. Government Printing Office, Third Edition, 1990.
       5. DHHS, National Institutes of Health, National
   Institutes of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases,
   ``Osteoporosis--Cause, Treatment, Prevention,'' NIH
   Publication No. 86 - 2226, U.S. Government Printing Office,
   May 1984 and May 1986.
       6. DHHS, National Institutes of Health ``Osteoporosis
   Report of the 1984 Consensus Development Conference on
   Osteoporosis,'' Journal of the American Medical Association,
   252:799 - 802, 1984.
       7. DHHS, National Institutes of Health. ``Consensus
   Development Conference: ``Prophylaxis and Treatment of
   Osteoporosis,'' American Journal of Medicine, 90:107 - 110,
   1991.
       8. DHHS, National Institutes of Health, National
   Institutes of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases,
   ``Osteoporosis: Research, Education, Health Promotion,'' NIH
   Publication No. 91 - 3216, U.S. Government Printing Office,
   1991.
       9. ``Diet, Nutrition, and the Prevention of Chronic
   Diseases,'' Report of World Health Organization Study Group,
   Technical Report Series 797, World Health Organization,
   Geneva, CH, 1990.
       10. ``Proceedings of the National Conference on Women's
   Health Series--Special Topic Conference on Osteoporosis,''
   Public Health Reports, September-October supp., U.S.
   Government Printing Office, 1989.
       11. DHHS, Public Health Service, ``Healthy People 2000:
   National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives,''
   Full Report, with Commentary, U.S. Government Printing Office,
   Washington, DC, pp. 120 - 121, 1991.
       12. Institute of Medicine, National Academy of Sciences,
   ``Nutrition During Pregnancy,'' Washington, DC, National
   Academy Press, 1990.
       13. LSRO, ``Calcium and Osteoporosis: A Critical Review of
   the Literature,'' Federation of American Societies for
   Experimental Biology, Washington, DC, 1991.
       14. Abraham, G. and H. Grewal, ``A Total Dietary Program
   Emphasizing Magnesium Instead of Calcium: Effect on the
   Mineral Density of Calcaneus Bone in Postmenopausal Women on
   Hormonal Therapy,'' Journal of Reproductive Medicine, 35:503 -
   506,1990.
       15. Allen, L., ``Calcium Bioavailability and Absorption: A
   Review,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 35:783 -
   808, 1982.
       16. Anderson, J., ``Dietary Calcium and Bone Mass Through
   the Lifecycle,'' Nutrition Today, March/April, pp. 9 - 14,
   1990.
       17. Anderson, J., ``Nutritional Biochemistry of Calcium
   and Phosphorus,'' Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry, 2:300 -
   307, 1991.
       18. Angus, R. and J. Eisman, ``Osteoporosis: The Role of
   Calcium Intake and Supplementations,'' Medical Journal of
   Australia, 148:(12):630 - 633, 1988.
       19. Angus, R., Sambrook, N. Pocock, and J. Eisman,
   ``Dietary Intake and Bone Mineral Density,'' Bone Mineral,
   4:265 - 277, 1988.
       20. Arnaud, C., ``Role of Dietary Calcium in
   Osteoporosis,'' Advances in Internal Medicine, 35:93 - 106,
   1990.
       21. Arnaud, C. and S. Sanchez, ``The Role of Calcium in
   Osteoporosis,'' Annual Review of Nutrition, 10:397 - 414,
   1990.
       22. Arnaud, C. and S. Sanchez, ``Calcium and Phosphorus,''
   in ``Present Knowledge in Nutrition,'' Myrtle L. Brown (ed.)
   Sixth Edition, Washington, DC, Nutrition Foundation, 1990.
       23. Avioli, L. and R. Heaney, ``Calcium Intake and Bone
   Health,'' Calcified Tissue International, 48:221 - 223, 1991.
       24. Bachrach, L., G. Guido, D. Katzman, F. Litt, and R.
   Marcus, ``Decreased Bone Density in Adolescent Girls with
   Anorexia Nervosa,'' Pediatrics, 86:440 - 447, 1990.
       25. Baran, D., A. Sorensen, J. Grimes, R. Lew, A.
   Karellas, B. Johnson, and J. Roche, ``Dietary Modification
   with Dairy Products for Preventing Vertebral Bone Loss in
   Premenopausal Women: A Three-Year Prospective Study,'' Journal
   of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 7(1):264 - 270,
   1990.
       26. Barrett-Connor, E., ``The RDA for Calcium in the
   Elderly: Too Little, Too late,'' Calcified Tissue
   International, 44:303 - 307, 1989.
       27. Behlen, P., ``Calcium in Women's Diets,'' National
   Food Review, 34:16 - 19, 1986.
       28. Bell, N., J. Shary, J. Stevens, M. Garza, L. Gordon,
   and J. Edwards, ``Demonstration that Bone Mass is Greater in
   Black Than in White Children,'' Journal of Bone and Mineral
   Research, 6(7):719 - 724, 1991.
       29. Bell, R., H. Draper, D. Tzeng, H. Shin, and G.
   Schmidt, ``Physiological Responses of Human Adults to Foods
   Containing Phosphate Additives,'' Journal of Nutrition, 107:42
   - 50, 1977.
       30. Broadus, A., ``Physiologic Functions of Calcium,
   Magnesium, and Phosphorus,'' Primer on the Metabolic Bone
   Diseases and Disorders of Mineral Metabolism, M. J. Favus
   (ed.), First Edition, (Kelseyville, CA: American Society for
   Bone and Mineral Research, 1990).
       31. Calvo, M., R. Kumar, and H. Heath, ``Elevated
   Secretion and Action of Serum Parathyroid Hormone in Young
   Adults Consuming High Phosphorous, Low Calcium Diets Assembled
   From Common Foods,'' Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
   Metabolism, 66:823 - 829, 1988.
       32. Calvo, M., R. Kumar, and H. Heath, ``Persistently
   Elevated Parathyroid Hormone Secretion and Action in Young
   Women After Four Weeks of Ingesting High Phosphorus, Low
   Calcium Diets,'' Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
   Metabolism, 70:1334 - 1340, 1990.
       33. Calvo, M., memo to file, October 1991.
       34. Canalis, E., ``Regulation of Bone Remodeling,'' Primer
   on the Metabolic Bone Diseases and Disorders of Mineral
   Metabolism, M. J. Favus (ed.) First Edition Kelseyville, CA:
   American Society for Bone and Mineral Research, 1990.
       35. Carroll, M., S. Abraham, and C. Dresser, ``Dietary
   Intake Source Data, United States, 1976 - 1980, Vital and
   Health Statistics, Series 11 - No. 231 DHHS Pub. No. (PHS) 83
   - 1681. Public Health Service, Washington, DC, U.S. Government
   Printing Office, March 1983.
       36. Cauley, J., J. Gutai, L. Kuller, D. LeDonne, R.
   Sandler, D. Sashin, and J. Powell, ``Endogenous Estrogen
   Levels and Calcium Intake in Postmenopausal Women:
   Relationship with Cortical Bone Measures,'' Journal of
   American Medical Association, 260(21):3150 - 3155, 1988.
       37. Chestnut, C., ``Is Osteoporosis a Pediatric Disease?
   Peak Bone Mass Attainment in the Adolescent Female,'' Public
   Health Reports, September-October:S50 - 54, 1989.
       38. Charles, P., ``Metabolic Bone Disease Evaluated By a
   Combined Calcium Balance and Tracer Kinetics Study,'' Danish
   Medical Bulletin, 36:463 - 479, 1989.
       39. Cimino, P., M. Brinker, S. Cook, and A. Harding, ``The
   Effects of Calcium on Bone Mineral Density in Postmenopausal
   Women with Colles Fractures,'' Journal, 141:25 - 29, 1989.
       40. Clark, D., J. Navia, L. Manson-Hing, and H. Duncan,
   ``Evaluation of Aveolar Bone in Relation to Nutritional Status
   During Pregnancy,'' Journal of Dental Research, 69:890 - 895,
   1990.
       41. Cohn, S., C. Abesamis, S. Yasumura, I. Zanza, and K.
   Ellis, ``Comparative Skeletal Mass and Radial Bone Mineral
   Content in Black and White Women,'' Metabolism, 26:171 - 178,
   1977.
       42. Columbano, A., G. Ledda, P. Rao, S. Rajalakshmi, and
   D. Sarma, ``Occurrence of Cell Death (Apoptosis) in
   Preneoplastic and Neoplastic Liver Cells,'' American Journal
   of Pathology, 116:441 - 446, 1984.
       43. Cooper, C., D. Barker, and C. Wickham, ``Physical
   Activity, Muscle Strength, and Calcium Intake in Fracture of
   the Proximal Femur in Britain,'' British Medical Journal,
   297:1443 - 1446, 1988.
       44. Crane, N., memo to the file, October 1991.
       45. Cumming, R., ``Calcium Intake and Bone Mass: A
   Quantitative Review of the Evidence,'' Calcified Tissue
   International, 47:(4):194 - 201, 1990.
       46. Draper, H., and R. Bell, ``Nutrition and
   Osteoporosis,'' Advances in Nutritional Research, Draper, H.,
   (ed.) New York, NY, Plenum, 1979.
       47. Dawson-Hughes, B., G. Dallal, E. Krall, L. Sadowski,
   N. Sahyoun, and S. Tannenbaum, ``A Controlled Trial of the
   Effect of Calcium Supplementation on Bone Density in
   Postmenopausal Women,'' New England Journal of Medicine,
   323:878 - 883, 1990.
       48. Desai, S., D. Daran, J. Grimes, M. Gionet, and M.
   Milne, `` Relationship of Diet, Axial, and Appendicular Bone
   Mass in Normal Premenopausal Women,'' American Journal of
   Medical Science, 293:218 - 220, 1987.
       49. Einhorn, T., B. Levine, and P. Michel, ``Nutrition and
   Bone,'' Orthopedic Clinics of North America, 21:43 - 50, 1990.
       50. DHHS and USDA, ``Nutrition Monitoring in the United
   States--A Progress Report from the Joint Nutrition Monitoring
   Evaluation Committee,'' DHHS Pub. No. (PHS) 86 - 1255, Public
   Health Service, Washington DC, U.S. Government Printing
   Office, 1986.
       51. Scrimshaw, N. and E., Murray, ``The Acceptability of
   Milk and Milk Products in Populations with High Prevalence of
   Lactose Intolerance,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
   48:1079 - 1159, 1988.
       52. Ettinger, B., H. Genant, and C. Cann, ``Longterm
   Estrogen Replacement Therapy Prevents Bone Loss and
   Fractures,'' Annals of Internal Medicine, 102:319 - 324, 1985.
       53. FDA, ``Vitamin and Mineral Drug Products for
   Over-the-Counter Human Use,'' (March 16, 1979, 44 FR 16126 -
   16176).
       54. USDA, Consumer Nutrition Information Service, Food
   Intakes: Individuals in 48 States,'' Nationwide Food
   Consumption Survey Report No. I - 2, 1977 - 1978.
       55. Fujita, T., M. Fukase, H. Miyamoto, T. Matsumoto, and
   T. Ohue, ``Increase of Bone Mineral Density by Calcium
   Supplement with Oyster Shell Electrolysate,'' Bone and
   Mineral, 11:85 - 91, 1990.
       56. Fuss, M., T. Pepersack, P. Bergman, T. Hurard, J.
   Simon, and J. Corvilan, ``Low Calcium Diet in Idiopathic
   Urolithiasis: A Risk Factor for Osteopenia as Great as in
   Primary Hyperparathyroidism,'' British Journal of Urology,
   65:560 - 563,1990.
       57. Fuss, M., T. Pepersack, J. Geel, J. Corvilian, J.C.
   Vandewalle, P. Bergmann, and J. Simon, ``Involvement of
   Low-Calcium Diet in Reduced Mineral Content of Idiopathic
   Renal Stone Formers,'' Calcified Tissue International, 46:9 -
   13, 1990.
       58. Greger, J. and M. Krystofiak, ``Phosphorus Intake of
   Americans,'' Food Technology, 32:78 - 84, 1982.
       59. Goulding, A., ``Osteoporosis: Why Consuming Less
   Sodium Chloride Helps to Conserve Bone,'' New Zealand Medical
   Journal, 103:120 - 122, 1990.
       60. Halioua, L. and J. Anderson, ``Lifetime Calcium Intake
   and Physical Activity Habits: Independent and Combined Effects
   on Radial Bone of Healthy Premenopausal Caucasian Women,''
   American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 49:534 - 541, 1989.
       61. Handschumacher, R., W. Creasey, J. Jaffe, C.
   Pasternal, and L. Hankin, ``Biochemical and Nutritional
   Studies on the Induction of Fatty Livers by Orotic Acid,''
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
   States of America, 46:178 - 186, 1960.
       62. Hasling, C., P. Charles, F. Jensen, and L. Moeskilde,
   ``Calcium Metabolism in Post menopausal Osteoporosis: The
   Influence of Dietary Calcium and Net Absorbed Calcium,''
   Journal of Bone and Mineral Research, 5:939 - 946,1990.
       63. Heaney, R., J. Gallagher, C. Johnston, R. Neer, M.
   Parffit, and G. Whedon, ``Calcium Nutrition and Bone Health in
   the Elderly,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 36:986
   - 1013, 1982.
       64. Heaney, R., ``Nutritional Factors in Bone Health,''
   Osteoporosis: Etiology, Diagnosis, and Management, B. Lawrence
   Riggs and L. Joseph Melton III (eds.) First Edition, New York,
   NY, Raven Press, 1988.
       65. Heaney, R., ``The Calcium Controversy: Finding a
   Middle Ground Between Extremes,'' Public Health Report, 104
   (Supp.) 36 - 46, 1989.
       66. Heaney, R., ``Nutritional Factors in Bone Health in
   Elderly Subjects: Methodological and Contextual Problems,''
   American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 50:1182 - 1189, 1989.
       67. Heaney, R., ``Calcium Intake and Bone Health
   Throughout Life,'' Journal of American Medical Woman's
   Association, 45:80 - 86, 1990.
       68. Heaney, R., ``Estrogen-Calcium Interactions in the
   Postmenopause: A Quantitative Description,'' Bone and Mineral,
   11:67 - 84, 1990.
       69. Heaney, R., ``Calcium Supplements: Practical
   Considerations,'' Osteoporosis International, 1:65 - 71, 1991.
       70. Heaney, R., C. Weaver, and R. Recker, ``Calcium
   Absorbability from Spinach,'' American Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 47:707 - 709, 1988.
       71. Heaney, R., and C. Weaver, ``Oxalate: Effect on
   Calcium Absorption,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
   50:830 - 832, 1989.
       72. Holbrook, T. E., D. Barrett-Connor, and Wingard,
   ``Dietary Calcium and Risk of Hip Fracture: 14 - Year
   Prospective Population Study,'' Lancet, 5:1046 - 1049, 1988.
       73. Ivanovich, P., H. Fellows, and C. Rich, ``The
   Absorption of Calcium Carbonate,'' Annals of Internal
   Medicine, 66:917 - 923, 1967.
       74. Jackson, J., ``Osteoporosis in Men,'' Primer on the
   Metabolic Bone Diseases and Disorders of Mineral Metabolism,
   M. J. Favus (ed.) First Edition Kelseyville, CA: American
   Society for Bone and Mineral Research, 1990.
       75. Jatlow, P., W. Adams, and R. Hanschumacher,
   ``Pathogenesis of Orotic Acid-Induced Fatty Changes in the Rat
   Liver, Light and Electron Microscopic Studies,'' American
   Journal of Pathology, 47:125 - 145, 1965.
       76. Jowsey, J., J. Gershon-Cohen, ``Effect of Dietary
   Calcium Level on Production and Reversal of Experimental
   Osteoporosis in Cats,'' Proceedings of the Society for
   Experimental Biology and Medicine, 116:437 - 442, 1964.
       77. Jowsey, J., L. Raisz, ``Experimental Osteoporosis and
   Parathyroid Activity,'' Endocrinology, 82:384 - 396, 1968.
       78. Kanders, B., D. Dempster, and R. Lindsay,
   ``Interaction of Calcium Nutrition and Physical Activity on
   Bone Mass in Young Women,'' Journal of Bone Mineral Research,
   3(2):145 - 149, 1988.
       79. Kanis, J., and R. Passmore, ``Calcium Supplementation
   of the Diet--I,'' British Medical Journal, 298:137 - 140,
   1989.
       80. Kanis, J. and R. Passmore, ``Calcium Supplementation
   of the Diet--I,'' British Medical Journal, 298:205 - 8, 1989.
       81. Kashyap, S., K. Schulze, M. Forsyth, R. Dell, R.
   Ramakrishanan, and W. Heird, ``Growth, Nutrient Retention, and
   Metabolic Response of Low-Birth-Weight Infants fed
   Supplemented and Unsupplemented Preterm Human Milk,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52:254 - 262, 1990.
       82. Kelly, P., N. Popcock, J. Eisman, and P. Sambrook,
   ``Dietary Calcium, Sex Hormones and Bone Mineral Density in
   Men,'' British Medical Journal, 300:1361 - 1365, 1990.
       83. Kelsey, J., ``Epidemiology of Osteoporosis and
   Associated Fractures,'' Bone and Mineral Research, W. Peck,
   (ed.) New York, NY, Elsevier Publishers, 1987.
       84. Kent, G., R. Price, D. Gutteridge, M. Smith, J. Allen,
   C. Bhagat, M. Barnes, C. Hickling, R. Retallack, S. Wilson, R.
   Devlin, C., Davies, and A. St. John, ``Human Lactation:
   Forearm Trabecular Bone Loss, Increased Bone Turnover, and
   Renal Conservation of Calcium and Inorganic Phosphate with
   Recovery of Bone Mass Following Weaning,'' Journal of Bone
   Mineral Research, 5:361 - 367, 1990.
       85. Kreipe, R., and G. Forbes, ``Osteoporosis: A New
   Morbidity for Dieting Female Adolescents,'' Pediatrics, 86:440
   - 447, 1990.
       86. Lacey, J., J. Anderson, T. Fujita, Y. Yoshimoto, M.
   Fukase, S. Tsuchie, and G. Koch, ``Correlates of Cortical Bone
   Mass Among Premenopausal and Postmenopausal Japanese Women,''
   Journal Bone Mineral Research, 6(7):651 - 659, 1991.
       87. Lemann, J., ``Intestinal Absorption of Calcium,
   Magnesium and Phosphorus,'' Primer on the Metabolic Bone
   Diseases and Disorders of Mineral Metabolism, M. J. Favus
   (ed.) First Edition Kelseyville, CA: American Society for Bone
   and Mineral Research, 1990.
       88. Lemann, J. ``The Urinary Excretion of Calcium,
   Magnesium and Phosphorus,'' Primer on the Metabolic Bone
   Diseases and Disorders of Mineral Metabolism, M. J. Favus
   (ed.), First Edition Kelseyville, CA: American Society for
   Bone and Mineral Research, 1990.
       89. Liel Y., J. Edwards, D. Spicer, L. Gordon, and N.
   Bell, ``The Effect of Race and Body Habitus on Bone Mineral
   Density of the Radius, Hip, and Spine in Premenopausal
   Women,'' Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism,
   66:1247 - 1250, 1
       90. Lindsay, R., D. Hart, J. Aitken, E. MacDonald, J.
   Anderson, and A. Clarke, ``Long-term Prevention of
   Postmenopausal Osteoporosis by Estrogen: Evidence for an
   Increased Bone Mass After Delayed Onset of Oestrogen
   Treatment,'' Lancet, 1:1038091040, 1976.
       91. Lindsay, R., ``Osteoporosis, Prevention, and
   Treatment,'' Primer on the Metabolic Bone Diseases and
   Disorders of Mineral Metabolism, M. J. Favus (ed.), First
   Edition, Kelseyville, CA: American Society for Bone and
   Mineral Research, 1990.
       92. Lindsay, R. and D. Dempster, ``Osteoporosis: Current
   Concepts,'' Bulletin of New York Academy of Medicine, 61:307 -
   322, 1985.
       93. Lukert, B., M. Carey, B. McCarty, S. Tiemann, L.
   Goodnight, M. Helm, R. Hassanein, C. Stevenson, M. Stoskopf,
   and L. Doolan, ``Influence of Nutritional Factors on
   Calcium-Regulating Hormones and Bone Loss,'' Calcified Tissue
   International, 40:119 - 125, 1987.
       94. Lutz, J. and R. Tesar, ``Mother-daughter Pairs: Spinal
   and Femoral Bone Densities and Dietary Intakes,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52:872 - 877, 1990.
       95. Marcus, R., ``Calcium Intake and Skeletal Integrity:
   Is There a Critical Relationship?'', Journal of Nutrition,
   117:631 - 635, 1987.
       96. Matkovic, V., K. Kostial, I. Simonovic, R. Buzina, A.
   Brodarec, and B. Nordin, ``Bone Status and Fracture Rates in
   Two Regions of Yugoslavia,'' American Journal of Clinical
   Nutrition, 32:540 - 549, 1979.
       97. Matkovic, V., D. Fontanna, C. Tominac, P. Goel, and C.
   Chestnut, ``Factors That Effect Peak Bone Mass in Adolescent
   Females,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 52:878 -
   888, 1990.
       98. Mazess, R., and H. Barden, ``Bone Density in
   Premenopausal Women: Effects of Age, Dietary Intake, Physical
   Activity, Smoking, and Birth-Control Pills,'' American Journal
   of Clinical Nutrition, 53:132 - 142, 1991.
       99. McCulloch, R., D. Bailey, C. Houston, and B. Dodd,
   ``Effects of Physical Activity, Dietary Calcium Intake and
   Selected Lifestyle Factors on Bone Density in Young Women,''
   Canadian Medical Association Journal, 142(3):221 - 227, 1990.
       100. Mundy, G., Calcium Homeostasis: Hypercalcemia and
   Hypocalcemia, First Edition, Martin Duntz Ltd., London, UK,
   1989.
       101. Public Health Service, National Center for Health
   Statistics, ``1985 Summary: National Hospital Discharge
   Survey, Advance Data from Vital and Health Statistics,'' No.
   127, DHHS Publication (PHS) 86 - 1250, September 25, 1986.
       102. Nelson, M., E. Fisher, A. Dilmanian, G. Dallal, and
   W. Evans, ``A 1 - Year Walking Program and Increased Dietary
   Calcium In Postmenopausal Women: Effects on Bone,'' American
   Journal Clinical Nutrition, 53:1304 - 11, 1991.
       103. Nordin, B. and R. Heaney, ``Calcium Supplementation
   of the Diet: Justified by Present Evidence,'' British Medical
   Journal, 300(6731):1056 - 60, 1990.
       104. Nordin, B. and H. Morris, ``The Calcium Deficiency
   Model for Osteoporosis,'' Nutritional Review, 47:65 - 72,
   1989.
       105. Human Nutrition Information Service, USDA, Nutrient
   Intakes: Individuals in 48 States, year 1977 - 1978, Report
   No. I - 2.
       106. Oenning, L., J. Vogel, and M. Calvo, ``Accuracy of
   Methods Estimating Calcium and Phosphorus Intake in Daily
   Diets,'' Journal of American Dietetic Association, 88:1076 -
   1078, 1988.
       107. Pak, C., and L., Avioli, ``Factors Affecting
   Absorbability of Calcium from Salt and Food,'' Calcified
   Tissue International, 43:55 - 60, 1988.
       108. Pak, C., J. Poindexter, and B. Finlayson, ``A Model
   System for Assessing Physicochemical Factors Affecting Calcium
   Absorbability from the Intestinal Tract,'' Journal Bone
   Mineral Research, 4:119 - 127, 1989.
       109. Peck, W., B. Riggs, N. Bell, R. Wallace, C. Johnston,
   S. Gordon, and L. Shulman, ``Research Directions in
   Osteoporosis,'' American Journal of Medicine, 84:275 - 282,
   1988.
       110. Pennington, J. and B. Young, ``Total Diet Study
   Nutritional Elements, 1982 - 1989,'' Journal of American
   Dietetic Association, 91:179 - 183.
       111. Picard, D., L. G. Ste. Marie, D., Coutu, et al.,
   ``Premenopausal Bone Mineral Content Relates to Height,
   Weight, and Calcium Intake During Early Adulthood,'' Bone
   Mineral, 4:299 - 309, 1988.
       112. Pittard W., K. Geddes, S. Sutherland, M. Miller, and
   B. Hollis, ``Longitudinal Changes in the Bone Mineral Content
   of Term and Premature Infants,'' American Journal Diseases of
   Children, 144:36 - 40, 1990.
       113. Polley, K., B. Nordin, P. Baghurst, C. Walker, and B.
   Chatterton, ``Effect of Calcium Supplementation on Forearm
   Bone Mineral Content in Postmenopausal Women: A Prospective,
   Sequential Controlled Trial,'' Journal of Nutrition, 117:1929
   - 1935, 1987.
       114. Portale, A., B. Halloran, M. Murphy, and R. Morris,
   ``Oral Intake of Phosphorous Can Determine the Serum
   Concentration of 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D by Determining its
   Production Rate in Humans,'' Journal of Clinical
   Investigations, 77:7 - 12, 1986.
       115. Portale, A., B. Halloran, and R. Morris, ``Dietary
   Intake of Phosphorus Modulates the Circadian Rhythm is Serum
   Concentration of Phosphorus: Implications for Renal Production
   of 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D,'' Journal of Clinical
   Investigations, 80:1147 - 1154, 1987.
       116. Portale, A., B. Halloran, and R. Morris,
   ``Physiologic Regulation of Serum Concentration of
   1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D by Phosphorus in Normal Man,'' Journal
   of Clinical Investigations, 83:1494 - 1499, 1989.
       117. Raupp, P., R. Von Kries, D. Schmiedlau, and F. Manz,
   ``Biochemical Evidence for the Need of Long-term Mineral
   Supplementation in an Extremely Low Birth Weight Infant Fed
   Own Mother's Milk Exclusively During the First 6 Months of
   Life,'' European Journal of Pediatrics, 149:806 - 808, 1990.
       118. Riggs, B. and L. Melton, ``Involutional
   Osteoporosis,'' New England Journal of Medicine, 314:1676 -
   1686, 1986.
       119. Riggs, B., H. Wahner, L. Melton, S. Richelson, H.
   Judd and W. O'Fallon, ``Dietary Calcium Intake and Rates of
   Bone Loss in Women,'' Journal of Clinical Investigations,
   80:979 - 982, 1987.
       120. Riis, B., K. Thomsen, and C. Christiansen, ``Does
   Calcium Supplementation Prevent Postmenopausal Bone Loss?'',
   New England Journal of Medicine, 316:173 - 177, 1987.
       121. Ross, P., H. Norimatsu, J. Davis, K. Yano, R.
   Wasnich, S. Fujiwara, Y. Hosoda, and L. Melton, ``A Comparison
   of Hip Fracture Incidence among Native Japanese Americans, and
   American Caucasians,'' American Journal of Epidemiology,
   133:801 - 809, 1991.
       122. Shangraw, R., ``Factors to Consider in the Selection
   of a Calcium Supplement,'' Public Health Reports,
   September-October:S46 - 50, 1989.
       123. Smith, E., C. Gilligan, and C. Sempos, ``Calcium
   Supplementation and Bone Loss in Middle Aged-Women,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 50:833 - 842, 1989.
       124. Stevenson, J., M. Whitehead, M. Padwick, J. Endacott,
   C. Sutton, L. Banks, C. Freemantle, T. Spinks, and R. Hesp,
   ``Dietary Intake of Calcium and Postmenopausal Bone Loss,''
   British Journal of Medicine, 297:15 - 17, 1988.
       125. Stevenson, J., B. Lees, M. Devenport, K. Ganger, and
   M. Cust, ``Determinants of Bone Density in Normal Women: Risk
   factors for Future Osteoporosis,'' British Medical Journal,
   298:924 - 928, 1989.
       126. Taelman, P., J. Kaufman, X. Janssens, H.
   Vandercauter, and A. Vermeulen, ``Reduced Forearm Bone Mineral
   Content and Biochemical Evidence of Increased Bone Turnover In
   Women With Euthyroid Goiter Treated with Thyroid Hormone,''
   Clinical Endocrinology, 33:107 - 117, 1990.
       127.Thomas, M., D. Simmons, L. Kidder, and M. Ibarra,
   ``Calcium Metabolism and Bone Mineralization in Female Rats
   Fed Diets Marginally Sufficient in Calcium: Effects of
   Increased Dietary Calcium Intake,'' Bone and Mineral, 12:1 -
   14, 1991.
       128. Tylavksy, F., and J. Anderson, ``Dietary Factors in
   Bone Health of Elderly Lacto-ovo-vegetarian and Omnivorous
   Women,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 48:842 -
   9,1988.
       129. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc., United
   States Pharmacopeia, 21st Revision; National Formulary,
   Sixteenth Edition, Rockville, MD, pp. 146 - 153, 1985.
       130. United States Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc., United
   States Pharmacopeia, 21st Revision; National Formulary,
   Sixteenth Edition (supp. 5) Rockville, MD, pp. 2353 - 2354,
   1987.
       131. Van Beresteijn, E., M. Van't Hof, H. De Waad, J.
   Raymakers, and S. Duursma, ``Relation of Axial Bone Mass to
   Habitual Calcium Intake and to Cortical Bone Loss in Healthy
   Early Postmenopausal Women,'' Bone, 11:7 - 13, 1990.
       132.Van Beresteijn, E., M. Van't Hof, G. Schaafsma, H. De
   Waad, and S., Duursma, ``Habitual Dietary Calcium Intake and
   Cortical Bone Loss in Perimenopausal Women: A Longitudinal
   Study,'' Calcified Tissue International, 47:338 - 334, 1990.
       133. Wardlaw, G., ``The Effects of Diet and Life-style on
   Bone Mass in Woman,'' Journal of the American Dietetic
   Association, 88:17 - 25, 1988.
       134. Yano, K., L. Heilbrun, R. Wasnich, J. Hankins, and J.
   Voegel, ``The Relationship Between Diet and Bone Mineral
   Content of Multiple Skeletal Sites in Elderly
   Japanese-American Men and Women Living in Hawaii,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 42:877 - 888, 1985.
       135. Zarakadas, M., R. Gougeon-Reyburn, E. Marliss, E.
   Block, and M. Alton-Mackey, ``Sodium Chloride Supplementation
   and Urinary Calcium Excretion in Postmenopausal Women,''
   American Journal Clinical Nutrition, 50:1088 - 1094, 1990.
       136. Maggi, S., J. Kelsey, J. Litvak, and S. Heyse,
   ``Incidence of Hip Fractures in the Elderly: A Cross-national
   Analysis,'' Osteoporosis International, 1:1 - 10, 1991.
       137. LSRO, Federation of American Societies for
   Experimental Biology: ``Nutrition Monitoring in the United
   States--An Update Report on Nutrition Monitoring,'' Prepared
   for the USDA and DHHS, DHHS Publication No. (PHS) 89 - 1255,
   Public Health Service, Washington, DC, U.S. Government
   Printing Office, September 1989.
       138. Heaney, R. P., ``Evaluation of Publicly Available
   Scientific Evidence Regarding Certain Nutrient-Disease
   Relationships: 3. Calcium and Osteoporosis,'' Life Sciences
   Research Office, Federation of American Societies for
   Experimental Biology, FDA Contract No.223 - 88 - 2124, Task
   order 9, Washington, DC, 1991.
       139. Forbes, R. M., K. E. Weingartner, H. M. Parker, R. R.
   Bell, and J. Erdman, Jr., ``Bioavailability of Rats of Zinc,
   Magnesium and Calcium in Casein-, Egg-, and Soy
   Protein-Containing Diets,'' Journal of Nutrition, 109:1652 -
   1660, 1979.
       140. Greger, J. L., C. E. Krzykowski, R. R. Khazen, and C.
   L. Krashoc, ``Mineral Utilization by Rats Fed Various
   Commercially Available Calcium Supplements or Milk,'' Journal
   of Nutrition, 117:717 - 724, 1987.
       141. Kochanowski, B.A., ``Effect of Calcium Citrate-Malate
   on Skeletal Development in Young, Growing Rats,'' Journal of
   Nutrition, 120:876 - 881, 1990.
       142. Lyle, B. J., K. E. McMahon, and P. A. Kreutler,
   ``Assessing the Potential Dietary Impact of Replacing Dietary
   Fat with Other Macronutrients,'' Journal of Nutrition, 122:211
   - 216, 1992.
       143. Broadus, A. E., Nephrolithiasis, In: Endocrinology
   and Metabolism, (eds) P. Felig, J. Baxter, A. Broadus, and L.
   Frohman, McGraw-Hill, New York, pp. 1119 - 1172, 1981.
       144. Andon, M. B., K. T. Smith, M. Bracker, D. Sartoris,
   P. Saltman, and L. Strause, ``Spinal Bone Density and Calcium
   Intake in Healthy Postmenopausal Women,'' American Journal of
   Clinical Nutrition, 54:927 - 9, 1991.
       145. Chan, G. M., ``Dietary Calcium and Bone Mineral
   Status of Children and Adolescents,'' American Journal of
   Diseases of Childhood, 145:631 - 634, 1991.
       146. Elders, P. J. M., J. C. Netelenbos, P. Lips, F. C.
   van Ginkel, E. Khoe, O. R. Leeuwenkamp, W. H. L. Hackeng, and
   P. F. van der Stelt, ``Calcium Supplementation Reduces
   Vertebral Bone Loss in Perimenopausal Women: A Controlled
   Trial in 248 Women
       147. Prince, R. L., M. Smith, I. M. Dick, R. I. Price, P.
   G. Webb, N. K. Henderson, and M. M. Harris, ``Prevention of
   Postmenopausal Osteoporosis: A comparative Study of Exercise,
   Calcium Supplementation, and Hormone-Replacement Therapy,''
   New England Journal of Medicine, 325:1189 - 1195, 1991.
       148. Sentipal, J. M., G. M. Wardlaw, J. Mahan, and V.
   Matkovic, ``Influence of Calcium Intake and Growth Indexes on
   Vertebral Bone Mineral Density in Young Females,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 54:425 - 8, 1991.
       149. Tilyard, M. W., G. F. S. Spears, J. Thomson, and S.
   Dovey, ``Treatment of Postmenopausal Osteoporosis with
   Calcitriol or Calcium,'' New England Journal of Medicine,
   326:357 - 62, 1992.
       150. Wheadon, M., A. Goulding, G. O. Barbezat, and A. J.
   Campbell, ``Lactose Malabsorption and Calcium Intake as Risk
   Factors for Osteoporosis in Elderly New Zealand Women,'' New
   Zealand Medical Journal, 104:417 - 419, 1991.
       151. Dawson-Hughes, B., ``Calcium Supplementation and Bone
   Loss: A Review of Controlled Clinical Trials,'' American
   Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 54:274S - 80S, 1991.
       152. Matkovic, V., ``Calcium Metabolism and Calcium
   Requirements During Skeletal Modeling and Consolidation of
   Bone Mass,'' American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 54:245S -
   60S, 1991.
       153. Heaney, R. P., ``Calcium Intake in the Osteoporotic
   Fracture Context: Introduction,'' American Journal Clinical
   Nutrition, 54:242S - 4S, 1991.
       154. Heaney, R. P., ``Lifelong Calcium Intake and
   Prevention of Bone Fragility in the Aged,'' Calcified Tissue
   International, 49:S42 - S45, 1991.
       155. Hansen, M. A., K. Overgaard, B. J. Riis, and C.
   Christiansen, ``Potential Risk Factors for Development of
   Postmenopausal Osteoporosis--
   Examined Over a 12-year Period,'' Osteoporosis International,
   1:95 - 102, 1991.
       156. Ringe, J. D., ``The Risk of Nephrolithiasis with Oral
   Calcium Supplementation,'' Calcified Tissue International,
   48:69 - 73, 1991.
   
   List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 101
   
       Food labeling, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
       Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
   and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food and
   Drugs, 21 CFR part 101 is amended as follows:
   
   
   PART 101--FOOD LABELING
   
       1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 101 continues to
   read as follows:
       Authority: Secs. 4, 5, 6 of the Fair Packaging and
   Labeling Act (15 U.S.C. 1453, 1454, 1455); secs. 201, 301,
   402, 403, 409, 701 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
   (21 U.S.C. 321, 331, 342, 343, 348, 371).
   
       2. Section 101.72 is added to subpart E to read as
   follows:
   
   
   101.72 Health claims: calcium and osteoporosis.
   
       (a) Relationship between calcium and osteoporosis. An
   inadequate calcium intake contributes to low peak bone mass
   and has been identified as one of many risk factors in the
   development of osteoporosis. Peak bone mass is the total
   quantity of bone present at maturity, and experts believe that
   it has the greatest bearing on whether a person will be at
   risk of developing osteoporosis and related bone fractures
   later in life. Another factor that influences total bone mass
   and susceptibility to osteoporosis is the rate of bone loss
   after skeletal maturity. An adequate intake of calcium is
   thought to exert a positive effect during adolescence and
   early adulthood in optimizing the amount of bone that is laid
   down. However, the upper limit of peak bone mass is
   genetically determined. The mechanism through which an
   adequate calcium intake and optimal peak bone mass reduce the
   risk of osteoporosis is thought to be as follows. All persons
   lose bone with age. Hence, those with higher bone massat
   maturity take longer to reach the critically reduced mass at
   which bones can fracture easily. The rate of bone loss after
   skeletal maturity also influences the amount of bone present
   at old age and can influence an individual's risk of
   developing ostet in reducing the rate of bone loss
   particularly in the elderly and in women during the first
   decade following menopause.
       (b) Significance of calcium. Calcium intake is not the
   only recognized risk factor in the development of
   osteoporosis, a multifactorial bone disease. Other factors
   including a person's sex, race, hormonal status, family
   history, body stature, level of exercise, general diet, and
   specific life style choices such as smoking and excess alcohol
   consumption affect the risk of osteoporosis.
       (1) Heredity and being female are two key factors
   identifying those individuals at risk for the development of
   osteoporosis. Hereditary risk factors include race: Notably,
   Caucasians and Asians are characterized by low peak bone mass
   at maturity.Caucasian women, particularly those of northern
   European ancestry, experience the highest incidence of
   osteoporosis-related bone fracture. American women of African
   heritage are characterized by the highest peak bone mass and
   lowest incidence of osteoporotic fracture, despite the fact
   that they have low calcium intake.
       (2) Maintenance of an adequate intake of calcium
   throughout life is particularly important for a subpopulation
   of individuals at greatest risk of developing osteoporosis and
   for whom adequate dietary calcium intake may have the most
   important beneficial effects on bone health. This target
   subpopulation includes adolescent and young adult Caucasian
   and Asian American women.
       (c) Requirements. (1) All requirements set forth in
   101.14 shall be met.
       (2) Specific requirements. (i) Nature of the claim. A
   health claim associating calcium with a reduced risk of
   osteoporosis may be made on the label or lableing of a food
   describe in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section, provided
   that:
       (A) The claim makes clear that adequate calcium intake
   throughout life is not the only recognized risk factor in this
   multifactorial bone disease by listing specific factors,
   including sex, race, and age that place persons at risk of
   developing osteoporosis and stating that an adequate level of
   exercise and a healthful diet are also needed;
       (B) The claim does not state or imply that the risk of
   osteoporosis is equally applicable to the general United
   States population. The claim shall identify the populations at
   particular risk for the development of osteoporosis. These
   populations include white (or the term ``Caucasian'') women
   and Asian women in their bone forming years (approximately 11
   to 35 years of age or the phrase ``during teen or early adult
   years'' may be used). The claim may also identify menopausal
   (or the term ``middle-aged'') women, persons with a family
   history of the disease, and elderly (or ``older'') men and
   women as being at risk;
       (C) The claim states that adequate calcium intake
   throughout life is linked to reduced risk of osteoporosis
   through the mechanism of optimizing peak bone mass during
   adolescence and early adulthood. The phrase ``build and
   maintain good bone health'' may be used to convey the concept
   of optimizing peak bone mass. When reference is made to
   persons with a family history of the disease, menopausal
   women, and elderly men and women, the claim may also state
   that adequate calcium intake is linked to reduced risk of
   osteoporosis through the mechanism of slowing the rate of bone
   loss;
       (D) The claim does not attribute any degree of reduction
   in risk of osteoporosis to maintaining an adequate calcium
   intake throughout life; and
       (E) The claim states that a total dietary intake greater
   than 200 percent of the recommended daily intake (2,000
   milligrams (mg) of calcium) has no further known benefit to
   bone health. This requirement does not apply to foods that
   contain less than 40 percent of the recommended daily intake
   of 1,000 mg of calcium per day or 400 mg of calcium per
   reference amount customarily consumed as defined in 101.12
   (b) or per total daily recommended supplement intake.
       (ii) Nature of the food. (A) The food shall meet or exceed
   the requirements for a ``high'' level of calcium as defined in
   101.54(c);
       (B) The calcium content of the product shall be
   assimilable;
       (C) Dietary supplements meet the United States
   Pharmacopeia (U.S.P.) standards for disintegration and
   dissolution applicable to their component calcium salts,
   except that dietary supplements for which no U.S.P. standards
   exist shall exhibit appropriate assimilability under the
   conditions of use stated on the product label;
       (D) A food or total daily recommended supplement intake
   shall not contain more phosphorus than calcium on a weight per
   weight basis.
       (d) Optional information. (1) The claim may include
   information from paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.
       (2) The claim may include information on the number of
   people in the United States who have osteoporosis. The sources
   of this information must be identified, and it must be current
   information from the National Center for Health Statistics,
   the National Institutes of Health, or ``Dietary Guidelines for
   Americans.''
       (e) Model health claim. The following model health claims
   may be used in food labeling to describe the relationship
   between calcium and osteoporosis:
   
   Model Health Claim Appropriate for Most Conventional Foods:
   
       Regular exercise and a healthy diet with enough calcium
   helps teen and young adult white and Asian women maintain good
   bone health and may reduce their high risk of osteoporosis
   later in life.
   
   Model Health Claim Appropriate for Foods Exceptionally High in
   Calcium and Most Calcium Supplements:
   
       Regular exercise and a healthy diet with enough calcium
   helps teen and young adult white and Asian women maintain good
   bone health and may reduce their high risk of osteoporosis
   later in life. Adequate calcium intake is important, but daily
   intakesabove about 2,000 mg are not likely to provide any
   additional benefit.
   
       Dated: December 17, 1992.
   David A. Kessler,
   Commissioner of Food and Drugs.
   Louis W. Sullivan,
   Secretary of Health and Human Services.
       Note: The following table will not appear in the annual
   Code of Federal Regulations.
   
   BILLING CODE 4160 - 01 - F
   [FR Doc. 92 - 31517 Filed 12 - 28 - 92; 8:45 am]
   BILLING CODE 4160 - 01 - C
   