Fiction  
Adventure
Adventures of Huckleberry Finn  
RC 43591
by Mark Twain 
read by John Polk
3 cassettes
A comprehensive edition of Twain's 1885 tale about a boy who runs
away from home and floats down the Mississippi on a raft with an
escaping slave. Includes four episodes originally deleted from
the first edition, an introduction by Twain biographer Justin
Kaplan, and an addendum of explanatory and interpretive notes.
Strong language. 1996.
Anything Considered RC 43770
by Peter Mayle 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
English expatriate Bennett tenders his services to a business
magnate with a secret formula for cultivating truffles in a
scheme to dominate the world market. When gangsters steal the
formula, Bennett snatches it back and enjoys a sybaritic holiday
while being pursued across the south of France. Bestseller 1996.
Apprentice to the Sea: A Tom Chatto Adventure RC 41979
by Philip McCutchan 
read by John Lescault
2 cassettes
McCutchan begins a series with this account of Tom Chatto, almost
seventeen and fresh from West Ireland, who signs on as an
apprentice aboard the Pass of Drumochter. On his first trip to
sea, Tom must deal with an aging but fair captain, a brutal first
mate, and a stowaway who proves to be a murderer. He also quickly
learns the value of what is termed "jodurecom"-job, duty,
responsibility, and command. 1994.
Gump and Co. RC 44596
by Winston Groom 
read by Jamie Horton
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Forrest Gump 
(RC 38876), Forrest has lost his "srimp bidness" and must find a
new way to support Forrest Junior, now that his beloved Jenny is
dead. This leads to involvement in creating the new Coke, Oliver
North's trial, Bill Clinton's real estate deals, bringing down
the Berlin Wall, and much more. Strong language and some
violence. 1995.
The Island of the Day Before RC 43382
by Umberto Eco 
read by Peter Gil
3 cassettes
Roberto della Griva, a shipwrecked spy in the South Pacific in
1643, rescues himself by climbing aboard an abandoned though
well-stocked ship. He eventually discovers a companion on board,
Father Caspar, who understands advanced concepts in time and
distance-the very ideas Roberto was hired to steal. Together they
conduct experiments and attempt to reach land. 1995.
The Legend of Tarik RC 44203
by Walter Dean Myers 
read by Gary Tipton
1 cassette
As a young boy, Tarik first saw his mother and a brother killed
and then a few days later watched as his father and other brother
were slaughtered by an evil warrior known as El Muerte. Tarik
vows revenge but knows he will need help. First he must seek a
magic sword, a priceless crystal, and a black horse. Some
violence. For junior and senior high readers. 1981.
The Riddle of the Sands: A Record of Secret Service RC 45072
by Erskine Childers 
read by Jim Zeiger
3 cassettes
Bestseller, first published in 1903, combines adventure at sea
with intrigue. The Baltic vacation of two friends aboard the
yacht Dulcibella is disrupted by the discovery of a German plan
to invade their British homeland. Carefully details the men's
achievements in seamanship and espionage. 1903.
Rising from the Ruins RC 43277
by Daniel Peters 
read by Gary Tipton
3 cassettes
Harper Yates, a Vietnam War "draft dodger," struggles as a
novelist, while his wife launches a late academic career. When he
finds himself stealing lawn ornaments, Yates realizes he needs a
change and accepts an invitation to help out at a Guatemalan
archaeological dig. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
1995.
Walkabout RC 41555
by James Vance Marshall 
read by Susan McInerney
1 cassette (Reissue)
An Aboriginal boy, who is on his ritual walkabout in Australia's
remote Northern Territory, encounters a brother and sister from
South Carolina who have just survived a plane crash. Although the
Aborigine is supposed to complete his walkabout alone, he
realizes he must save the children. But when the girl looks at
him in fear, he thinks she has seen the spirit of death and that
he will soon die. For junior and senior high readers. 1959.
Animals
Final Refuge: A Novel of Eco-Terrorism  RC 43082
by James L. Haley 
read by Gary Tipton
2 cassettes
Eric Jackson's love and life's work, his Houston wildlife
preserve, has cost him his marriage, and now two beloved black
rhinos have been killed by poachers. Learning that the thieves
plan to raid his refuge for more rare-animal loot, Eric confronts
the armed poachers and defends his animals. Some strong language.
1994.
Raptor Red RC 42714
by Robert T. Bakker 
read by Celeste Lawson
2 cassettes
Widowed, somewhat slim Utahraptor in search of large, tick-free
velociraptor mate-for-life; must be family oriented, have good
genes, enjoy hunting and gorging, and not be thin-skinned. The
author of this "romance" novel, a world-renowned paleontologist,
works information about these smart and deadly dino- saurs into
an amusing tale of a year in the life of a female, Raptor Red.
Violence, strong language, and some descriptions of sex. 1995.
Tales from Watership Down RC 43864
by Richard Adams 
read by John Horton
2 cassettes
Twenty-four years after writing Watership Down (RC 35730), Adams
now offers nineteen short stories about the lives of the rabbits
since they defeated General Woundwort. Many of the stories focus
on the hero El-ahriarah, and all deal with the theme of the human
enemy versus the animal. 1996.
Classics
Adventures of Huckleberry Finn  
RC 43591
by Mark Twain 
read by John Polk
3 cassettes
A comprehensive edition of Twain's 1885 tale about a boy who runs
away from home and floats down the Mississippi on a raft with an
escaping slave. Includes four episodes originally deleted from
the first edition, an introduction by Twain biographer Justin
Kaplan, and an addendum of explanatory and interpretive notes.
Strong language. 1996.
Bleak House RC 43614
by Charles Dickens 
read by George Holmes
7 cassettes (Reissue)
Nineteenth-century satire of the English judicial system and
aristocratic class of Dickens's time. Follows the fortunes of
young Esther Summerson and her mother, Lady Dedlock, as the
disposition of the Jarndyce estate drags on year after year.
1980.
The Caves of Steel RC 44325
by Isaac Asimov 
read by Ken Kliban
2 cassettes (Reissue)
A thousand years in the future, Earth's teeming billions are
crowded into huge enclosed cities. New York City detective Elijah
Baley is forced to team up with an android to solve the murder of
a prominent spacer from the outer worlds. Failure will jeopardize
any hope of Earth's overcrowded population reaching out to the
stars. 1954.
The Complete Short Stories of Mark Twain RC 44119
by Mark Twain 
read by L.J. Ganser
6 cassettes (Reissue)
Sixty stories filled with folklore and wit that span Twain's
entire writing career and are arranged chronologically by
publishing date from 1865 through 1916. Some entries, like "The
Trials of Simon Erikson" and four other stories from Roughing It
(RC 12437), are fictional yarns extracted from nonfiction works.
Includes an introduction by editor Charles Neider. 1957.
The Friendly Persuasion RC 39935
by Jessamyn West 
read by Janet Daley
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Jess Birdwell is an Irish nurseryman who is homesteading in
Indiana with his wife, Eliza, a Quaker minister, at the time of
the Civil War. Jess is also a music lover who enjoys fast
horses-worldly desires for a Quaker. With a sense of sharing and
humor, the Birdwell family negotiates the arrival of a new organ
and the threat of Confederate soldiers. 1940.
The Informer RC 43629
by Liam O'Flaherty 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
A melodrama set in Dublin in the 1920s just after the Irish
rebellion. Francis McPhillip, who has killed a man and been in
hiding for six months, has returned to Dublin to see his family.
He is betrayed to the police by Gypo Nolan, and when surrounded,
Francis shoots himself. Hunted by members of the revoluntionary
organization, Gypo finds Mrs. McPhillip, Francis's mother, in
church, and begs her forgiveness. 1925.
Little Dorrit RC 42796
by Charles Dickens 
read by Vanessa Maroney
7 cassettes (Reissue)
Classic nineteenth-century novel portrays a changing society and
prison life. William Dorrit, who owes money, lives in debtor
prison at Marshalsea with his children Edward, Fanny, and
Amy-known as Little Dorrit. Amy falls in love with and marries
her middle-aged benefactor. 1857.
Pudd'nhead Wilson and Those Extraordinary Twins RC 41298
by Mark Twain 
read by Chuck Young
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Two novels by the American humorist. In Pudd'nhead Wilson Twain
provides a complex, ironic, and morally disturbing account of
human nature under slavery as a brilliant and inventive
nineteenth-century lawyer attempts to prove his case by using the
newfangled science of fingerprinting. Those Extraordinary Twins
is about Siamese twins who share many amusing problems. 1894.
So Big RC 44189
by Edna Ferber 
read by Jill Ferris
2 cassettes (Reissue)
A farm woman's indomitable spirit and quick response to beauty
are unquenched by years of hardship-all for the sake of her son.
Pulitzer Prize. Originally published in 1924. 1995.
The Stranger RC 40902
by Albert Camus 
read by Phil Regensdorf
1 cassette
An existential novel originally published in 1942, set in
Algiers, about a man who resists any commitment, rendering his
life meaningless. He does not react to his mother's death nor to
a killing he commits, and he becomes a placid prisoner convicted
of murder. His own impending death, however, leads him to some
realizations. 1988.
Uncle Silas: A Tale of Bartram-Haugh  RC 44497
by J.S. Le Fanu 
read by Barbara Caruso
4 cassettes (Reissue)
Maud Ruthyn, the heroine of this classic Victorian novel, recalls
her fear of death, her moody father, the grotesque Madame de la
Rougierre, and the suspicions surrounding her Uncle Silas. New
introduction by Frederick Shroyer. 1966.
Waverley; or, 'Tis Sixty Years Since  
RC 44321
by Sir Walter Scott 
read by George Holmes
5 cassettes
This historical novel, the first in English and the first fiction
work by this author, tells of Edward Waverley, a romantic captain
in the royal army, who resigns his commission and proposes
marriage to an ardent supporter of the Stuart cause. Rejected, he
enters the service of Prince Charles Edward and becomes a rebel.
1814.
Contemporary Fiction
Animal Acts RC 43378
by Rhoda Lerman 
read by Nanette Savard
2 cassettes
Suburban housewife Linda Morris sneaks away from her rich, kind
husband and her dangerous lover to visit her husband's Rent-A-Pet
gorilla, Moses, at Coney Island. When Moses kills his keeper in
self-defense, Linda sets off with the fugitive ape to Florida and
freedom. En route they forge a rare bond. Strong language. 1994.
Art and Lies: A Piece for Three Voices and a Bawd RC 43202
by Jeanette Winterson 
read by Lisette Lecat
2 cassettes
A story of three people aboard a high-speed train out of London
in the year 2000. Handel, a surgeon and priest; Picasso, a young
woman artist; and Sappho, a lesbian poet, are all fleeing lives
of suppression in a brutal world of technology. Strong language
and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
Baby Be-Bop RC 43313
by Francesca Lia Block 
read by Jennifer Mendenhall
1 cassette
In this companion to Weetzie Bat 
(RC 37026), sixteen-year-old Dirk McDonald comes to terms with
being gay. He is consumed with self-loathing because of his
unrequited love for his best friend. While recuperating from a
savage beating, Dirk is comforted by surreal visitations from his
deceased parents. Some strong language. For senior high and older
readers. 1995.
Breath, Eyes, Memory RC 46001
by Edwidge Danticat 
read by Anne Hancock
1 cassette
Until age twelve, Sophie is raised by her aunt in Haiti. Her
mother then sends for her to come to New York and explains that
Sophie is the product of rape. When a grown Sophie is befriended
by an older musician, her mother tests her virginity. Sophie
rebels by violently deflowering herself, an act that later causes
her to seek sexual phobia therapy. She marries the musician and
tries to come to terms with her past as her mother does the same.
Some violence. 1994.
The Constellations RC 43488
by James Finney Boylan 
read by Barbara Pinolini
2 cassettes
Fifteen-year-old Phoebe runs away in search of her mother,
leaving the adults at home to their lustful frenzy. Her offbeat
adventures include a trip to a tattoo parlor and discovery of a
latex brain. After three months, she rejoins her zany and
dysfunctional family. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
Sequel to The Planets (RC 34507). 1994.
Go Ask Alice RC 44179
by Anonymous 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
1 cassette (Reissue)
Based on the diary of a fifteen-year-old girl who turned to drugs
because of her feelings of loneliness and rebellion against the
world. Though she tries to stop, she dies of an overdose three
weeks after her seventeenth birthday. Strong language. For junior
and senior high readers. 1971.
Jazz RC 44374
by Toni Morrison 
read by Camille McCurty Ali
2 cassettes
Joe, a middle-aged salesman, kills his teenaged mistress. His
wife goes berserk at the funeral and attempts to mutilate the
corpse. Against the steady pulse of Harlem in the 1920s, the
storyteller improvises on the passionate and tragic themes of
these three characters. Past and present voices, like jazz, share
the spotlight and fade out. Some strong language. Bestseller
1992.
John's Wife RC 43792
by Robert Coover 
read by Fred Major
4 cassettes
John is a wealthy and prominent builder in middle America, and
his wife is the "coveted object, elusive mystery, beloved ideal,
hated rival, princess, saint, or social asset" of almost everyone
in town. The story views John's wife through the eyes of the
characters who are obsessed with her. Strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1996.
Lying Together RC 44505
by D.M. Thomas 
read by John Horton
2 cassettes
Conclusion of the Russian Nights quintet of novels in which the
central theme is improvisation. In this volume, the author
himself assumes the character of a writer who meets old friends
at a conference. Their reminiscences form sequential patterns
that play out like jazz, creating tension and resolution with
eternal motifs like truth and lies or life and death. Sequel to
Summit (RC 44517). Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1990.
Sphinx RC 44511
by D.M. Thomas 
read by John Horton
2 cassettes
Set in various cold-war capitals during the twentieth century,
this novel encompasses verse, drama, and prose. Themes are both
fantastic and realistic, portraying espionage, love and betrayal,
and truth and lies, symbolizing the state of the Soviet regime.
Third in the Russian Nights quintet, following Ararat (RC 19387)
and Swallow (RC 38668). Strong language. 1986.
The Woman and the Ape RC 44318
by Peter Hoeg 
read by Barbara Caruso
2 cassettes
Scientists from the London zoo capture a highly intelligent ape,
whom they name Erasmus. Fearing that the captive primate is
headed for abusive experimentation, Madelene, a scientist's wife,
absconds with Erasmus to an idyllic reserve, where they share
their lives and passions. Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Zoo Where You're Fed to God  
RC 39974
by Michael Ventura 
read by June Carter
2 cassettes
James Abbey, a fifty-year-old surgeon, has spent his life
fighting his fears. His marriage crumbles, then his defenses. At
the zoo, he hears voices and develops obsessions with the animals
and with a young woman he meets. Realizing that his estranged
adolescent son is fighting his own fears and obsessions, Abbey
finally learns from the animals how to be more human. Some strong
language. 1994.
Family
All That Glitters RC 43328
by V.C. Andrews 
read by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
In the sequel to Pearl in the Mist 
(RC 39864), Ruby is living in her late grandmother's bayou shack
with her baby, Pearl. Wealthy Paul Tate wants to marry Ruby even
though they now know they are half-siblings. She agrees to a
celibate marriage for Pearl's sake, but cannot forget her love
for Pearl's father, Beau. Meanwhile, Ruby's twin, Gisselle,
continues to be a thorn in her side. Some strong language and
some explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
Behind the Scenes at the Museum  
RC 42712
by Kate Atkinson 
read by Jennifer Mendenhall
3 cassettes
"I exist!" Beginning with her conception above a Yorkshire pet
shop in 1951, Ruby Lennox intermingles accounts of her adventures
and misadventures with the history of four generations of her
female ancestors. 1995 Whitbread Prize. 1995.
The Book of Mercy RC 44065
by Kathleen Cambor 
read by Ann Hodapp
2 cassettes
Retired fireman Edmund Mueller's lonely life is haunted by
melancholy memories of his runaway wife and estranged children.
Mueller practices alchemy, hoping to restore his lost past. His
psychiatrist daughter uncovers the secret of her father's
obsession and realizes that her own life is also a futile quest
for happiness. Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1996.
A Charmed Circle RC 43392
by Anna Kavan 
read by Corrie James
2 cassettes
The story of a dysfunctional family in an English manufacturing
town in the 1920s. Two daughters run away from their oppressive
home to establish independent lives. But, over time, neither
woman proves able to dissociate herself from the home she left,
and both are drawn back into the family circle. 1929.
Clear Light of Day RC 43122
by Anita Desai 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
An Indian girl describes middle-class life in Old Delhi in 1947,
at the time of partition and independence. Focuses on the Das
family, made up of a diabetic mother, a mostly absent father, a
widowed aunt, and various children. 1980.
Commonwealth Avenue RC 43523
by Linda Nevins 
read by Nanette Savard
3 cassettes
After a decade away, Hollywood insider Zoe Hillyard is called
home to Boston for her grandmother's funeral. At risk to her
career, she extends her visit in the family mansion and discovers
her great-grandmother's long-hidden diary. The diary provides her
with a means to rescue her dysfunctional family and to achieve
her own happiness. 1996.
The Crazy Hunter RC 44453
by Kay Boyle 
read by Laura Giannarelli
1 cassette
Mrs. Lombe has long resented her husband, considering him a
failure, particularly after he pays too much for their daughter's
horse. When the horse becomes blind, Mrs. Lombe wants him
destroyed, but father and daughter unite to oppose her. 1940.
Crooked Little Heart RC 44316
by Anne Lamott 
read by Suzanne Toren
3 cassettes
In this sequel to Rosie (RC 20356), young tennis star Rosie
Ferguson is beset by the anxieties of early adolescence and the
unwanted attentions of a menacing, middle-aged, court-side
spectator. When tragedy strikes close to her family, Rosie rises
to confront her fears. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
Le Divorce RC 44152
by Diane Johnson 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Isabel Walker is in Paris to help her pregnant stepsister, Roxy,
whose French husband has left her for another woman. The two
sisters, their family, and Roxy's in-laws attempt to work things
out, hampered by vast differences in attitudes. The ownership of
a valuable painting that Roxy gave to her husband as a wedding
present further complicates matters. Some strong language.
Bestseller 1997.
Dreams of the Centaur RC 43565
by Montserrat Fontes 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
3 cassettes
In this prequel to First Confession 
(RC 34291), José Durcal is killed and his eldest son, Alejo,
avenges the death with terrible results that take him to prison,
war, and a brush with the slave trade. His special bond with his
mother, Felipa, prevails throughout, even as Alejo risks personal
danger to avert a massacre of the Yaqui Indians. Strong language
and violence. 1996.
Emma Watson: The Watsons Completed  RC 44694
by Joan Aiken 
read by Anne Flosnik
2 cassettes
Aiken continues The Watsons, begun by Jane Austen in 1804. After
living with an aunt for fourteen years, Emma, the youngest of a
large family, returns home to face a spinsterhood of genteel
poverty with her favorite sister, Elizabeth. It falls to them to
deal with the foibles and misadventures of their siblings,
assorted relatives, and eccentric neighbors. 1996.
Family Album RC 44233
by Danielle Steel 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
3 cassettes
A melodrama of the enduring love between talented movie
star-director Fay Price and the playboy shipping heir Ward Thayer
and the growing pains of their five children. Includes the grit
and glitter of Hollywood life from the war years of the 1940s to
the 1980s. Strong language and some explicit descriptions of sex.
1985.
The Flaming Corsage RC 43596
by William Kennedy 
read by J.P. Linton
2 cassettes
This sequel to Very Old Bones (RC 35384) opens in 1908 with a
murder-suicide by a husband who finds his wife in a hotel room
under compromising circumstances. The story goes on to limn the
complex romance and doomed marriage between an Irish Catholic
writer and a high-born Protestant woman. Descriptions of sex.
1996.
Flesh and Blood RC 43094
by Michael Cunningham 
read by Barry Bernson
3 cassettes
The saga of the Stassos clan, from poverty in Greece to wealth,
dysfunction, and tragedy in America. In the family's
nouveau-riche home on Long Island, the crude patriarch
Constantine presides over his refined wife, two daughters, and
gay son. As the years pass, all must confront their personal
demons. Strong language and explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
The Friendly Persuasion RC 39935
by Jessamyn West 
read by Janet Daley
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Jess Birdwell is an Irish nurseryman who is homesteading in
Indiana with his wife, Eliza, a Quaker minister, at the time of
the Civil War. Jess is also a music lover who enjoys fast
horses-worldly desires for a Quaker. With a sense of sharing and
humor, the Birdwell family negotiates the arrival of a new organ
and the threat of Confederate soldiers. 1940.
Heart Song RC 44797
by V.C. Andrews 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
Following the death of her husband, Haille Logan leaves her
daughter, Melody, with the Logan family on Cape Cod and is later
killed in an accident. A stranger to her stepfather's family,
Melody wants to learn the identity of her real father. But before
she can unlock the secret, she sees a picture of a model who
resembles her mother. Sequel to Melody (RC 43437). Bestseller
1997.
Hidden Jewel RC 43329
by V.C. Andrews 
read by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
In this sequel to All That Glitters 
(RC 43328), Ruby and Beau's daughter, Pearl, graduates from high
school and plans to become a doctor. But before the summer is
over, one of Pearl's brothers dies and his twin becomes
catatonic. To set things straight, Ruby turns to Cajun voodoo and
disappears into the bayou. Beau is too distraught to go after
Ruby, so Pearl goes. Some strong language and some descriptions
of sex. Bestseller 1995.
Homecoming RC 45255
by Belva Plain 
read by Terry Hayes Sales
1 cassette
Annette Byrne, eighty-five, has had enough of the estrangement
between her two sons and among other family members. She summons
them all to her home on a wintry December day. Tensions are high,
and harsh words begin to flow. Then a near tragedy puts a
different light on the day for each of those present. Bestseller
1997.
In the Deep Midwinter RC 45097
by Robert Clark 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
When his brother is killed in a hunting accident, lawyer Richard
MacEwan arrives to identify the body and handle affairs. Among
his brother's personal effects, he finds a letter suggesting his
own wife's infidelity. Further revelations force the family to
confront and reconcile other past wrongs. Descriptions of sex.
1997.
Justice RC 42536
by Larry Watson 
read by Michael Kramer
2 cassettes
Prequel to Montana 1948 (RC 37940). A series of episodes dating
from 1899 about the Hayden family. Tells how patriarch Julian
Hayden settled in Montana; recounts sons Wesley and Frank's
youthful adventure outside sheriff Julian's jurisdiction; and
portrays Wesley's wife's misgivings about her husband. Strong
language. 1995.
Like Mother, Like Daughter RC 44466
by Marcia Rose 
read by Annie Wauters
4 cassettes
Portrays four generations of twentieth-century women striving to
maintain independence but finding motherhood a struggle. Leah,
the matriarch, is a journalist championing women's rights, Jo
becomes a World War II photographer, Sarah is a singer and
songwriter, and Annie is a comedienne. Strong language. 1994.
The Marks of Birth RC 43215
by Pablo Medina 
read by Ilona Dulaski
2 cassettes
Felicia Turner is the matriarch of her Caribbean family. Her son,
Fernando García-Turner, and his wife, Rosa, are forced to flee to
America with Felicia's beloved grandson, Antón, who bears the
family's hereditary birthmark. Antón and his family face hardship
adapting to American society while living in exile. Some
descriptions of sex. 1994.
Mason's Retreat RC 43854
by Christopher Tilghman 
read by Christopher Hurt
2 cassettes
Faced with declining fortunes in England, Edward Mason moves his
family to Maryland's Eastern Shore in 1936. As war threatens and
Edward returns to England on business, family conflicts and
betrayals lead to tragedy and loss of birthright. Strong language
and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Mazel RC 43628
by Rebecca Goldstein 
read by Suzanne Toren
2 cassettes
Seventyish Sasha Saunders believes in mazel-luck in Yiddish. In
fact it is mazel that has gotten Sasha to this place in
life-Lipton, New Jersey, where a granddaughter has recently
married and is expecting her first child. And as they await the
birth, Sasha looks back over her life as an actress in Poland
between the world wars, and the luck that has brought her to this
time. National Jewish Book Award. 1995.
Melody RC 43437
by V.C. Andrews 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Melody Logan loses her beloved father in a coal mining accident.
When her mother leaves her with the Logan family on Cape Cod,
Melody tries to adjust to her hard, new life. She finds a
faithful ally in her cousin, Cary, who reveals the family's
tragic past. Bestseller 1996.
Power of a Woman RC 44840
by Barbara Taylor Bradford 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
Stephanie "Stevie" Jardine runs the American branch of Jardine's,
the prestigious Crown jewellers of London. Widowed at the age of
twenty-three, she raised three sons and a daughter while running
a first-class company. Now as she approaches fifty, she fears one
son is trying to force her out of the company. She also worries
about her daughter, who demands to know her real father. Some
strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Seedtime and Harvest RC 43010
by Mary E. Pearce 
read by Patricia Kilgarriff
2 cassettes
Sequel to The Land Endures (RD 17912), set in England in the
decades just prior to and during World War II. Charlie Truscott,
thirty-five, has become a mechanic, repairing cars and farm
equipment in Herrick Cross. Linn Mercybright, her father, and her
illegitimate son have also settled down in Herrick Cross after
several moves. Charlie and Linn soon marry, but their hopeful
plans are destroyed by Linn's ambition. 1982.
Shards of Memory RC 42946
by Ruth Prawer Jhabvala 
read by Barbara Pinolini
2 cassettes
A twentieth-century saga covering four generations of a New York
City family with ties to London and India. The first narrator is
the genial grandmother called Baby, who tells of her mother's
marriage with an Indian poet and the international religious
movement they founded. 1995.
Show Me No Mercy: A Compelling Story of Remarkable Courage RC
39982
by Robert Perske 
read by Phil Regensdorf
1 cassette
Andy and Maggie Banks and their teenage twins, Ben and Beth, are
a close-knit family. When a car accident leaves Maggie and Beth
dead and Andy paralyzed, an aunt decides that Ben, who has Down's
syndrome, must be institutionalized. But feisty Ben is helping
Andy recover, and he doesn't mind upsetting expectations at the
institute. For junior and senior high readers. 1984.
Somebody Else's Mama RC 43734
by David Haynes 
read by Camille McCurty Ali
3 cassettes
Al and Paula Johnson live with their twin sons in an African
American town in northern Missouri. Paula cares not only for her
sons, but also for her feisty and cantankerous mother-in-law,
Miss Kezee, whom Paula invited to stay after Ms. Kezee became a
widow. Paula struggles to unify her household while Al runs for
mayor. Some strong language. 1995.
Unfinished Symphony RC 45275
by V.C. Andrews 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Heart Song (RC 44794), Melody Logan longs to
discover the identity of her real father. Following a clue, she
travels to Los Angeles and learns 
that her mother also is still alive. When Melody returns to her
grandmother's house on Cape Cod, more family secrets are
unearthed. Bestseller 1997.
Vegas Heat RC 44138
by Fern Michaels 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
The story of the Thornton family continues in 1980 as Fanny
Thornton, divorced from Ash, marries his twin, Simon. But Fanny's
life remains in turmoil, as her marriage to Simon estranges her
from the rest of her family. She also finds herself struggling to
save Babylon when Ash becomes fatally ill. Sequel to Vegas Rich
(RC 44137). Some strong language and some descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
Vegas Rich RC 44137
by Fern Michaels 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
4 cassettes
In this spinoff from Michaels's Texas trilogy, Sallie Coleman
comes to Las Vegas and, because she is kind to an old man,
suddenly finds herself very rich. The story continues with
accounts of Sallie's grandchildren. Prequel to Vegas Heat 
(RC 44138). Some strong language and some explicit descriptions
of sex. 1996.
The Virgin in the Garden RC 42967
by A.S. Byatt 
read by Corrie James
4 cassettes
A coming-of-age story set in 1953 England. Alternating chapters
follow the lives of three Potter children: Stephanie, an atheist,
marries the local curate; Frederica, an actress, falls in love
with a playwright; and Marcus, who dabbles with psychic
phenomena, goes mad. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
1978.
What Is Told RC 43605
by Askold Melnyczuk 
read by Ken Kliban
1 cassette
Ukrainian professor Zenon Zabobon weds a peasant girl, Natalka,
on the day Archduke Ferdinand is shot in Sarajevo. The family
survives the upheavals of two world wars, then migrates to New
Jersey in 1950 only to face "the subtle sabotages of peacetime
suburbia." Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1994.
Where the Wild Rose Blooms: Rocky Mountain Memories, Book 1 RC
44430
by Lori Wick 
read by Michele Schaeffer
2 cassettes
Morgan Fontaine, his wife, and his five daughters move to
Colorado to go into business with his brother. They quickly
settle into the community and the eldest daughter marries. But
her sister Jackie finds herself at odds with young Clayton
Taggart. Resolving their differences, they eventually plan to
marry until an accident intervenes. Prequel to Whispers of
Moonlight (RC 44429). 1996.
Whispers of Moonlight: Rocky Mountain Memories, Book 2 RC 44429
by Lori Wick 
read by Michele Schaeffer
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Where the Wild Rose Blooms (RC 44430), Jackie
Fontaine's marriage to Clayton Taggart brings them into contact
with Travis Buchanan, a good friend of Jackie's brother-in-law,
Robert Langley. Travis is a very troubled man who married his
boss's daughter, only to have her disappear a week after the
wedding. 1996.
Young Art and Old Hector RC 44406
by Neil Gunn 
read by Vanessa Maroney
2 cassettes
Eight-year-old Art Macrae is beset by the travails of family life
in turn-of-the-century Scotland. As he copes with his overbearing
siblings and a school bully, the birth of a brother displaces Art
as the family's youngest. Elderly Hector, the village sage, helps
Art navigate the shoals of youth. For junior and senior high
readers. 1976.
Fantasy
Belgarath the Sorcerer RC 43837
by David and Leigh Eddings 
read by Roy Avers
5 cassettes
In this prequel to the Belgariad and the Malloreon series,
Belgarath the Sorcerer is encouraged by his grandson, Garion, to
explain how the evil god Torak split the world apart, and how
Aldur set it right again with Belgarath's help. 1994.
The Bishop's Heir: The Histories of King Kelson, Volume 1 RC
44521
by Katherine Kurtz 
read by Gary Tipton
3 cassettes
There has been some peace between the Church and the Deryni in
the kingdom of Gwynedd, but they are once again at war. There is
also the threat of a revolution. Some factions want to become
independent kingdoms. And Bishop Loris, with the support of other
prelates, plans to do away with King Kelson and all the Deryni.
Prequel to The King's Justice 
(RC 44522). Some violence. 1984.
Blood of the Fold: The Sword of Truth, Book 3 RC 41104
by Terry Goodkind 
read by Nick Sullivan
4 cassettes
A group of fanatical zealots called Blood of the Fold joins
forces with the evil emperor Jagang. War wizard Richard Cypher
and his lover, mother confessor Kahlan Amnell, must combine their
magical powers to fend off the impending Armageddon. Sequel to
Stone of Tears (RC 41792). Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. 1996.
Camber of Culdi: The Legends of Camber of Culdi, Volume 1 RC
44586
by Katherine Kurtz 
read by Erik Sandvold
2 cassettes
Lord Camber MacRorie, seventh earl of Culdi, wants only to retire
to his family estate and return to his monastic studies. But
Gwynedd is currently ruled by Imre and his sister Ariella, and
Lord Camber knows the kingdom will never be safe until a Haldane
monarch is returned to 
the throne. Prequel to Saint Camber 
(RC 44587). Some violence. 1976.
Camber the Heretic: The Legends of Camber of Culdi, Volume 3 RC
44588
by Katherine Kurtz 
read by Erik Sandvold
4 cassettes
Twelve years ago, in order to help King Cinhil maintain peace
between humans and the Deryni, Camber "died" and then took on the
form of Bishop Allister Cullen. Now, however, King Cinhil is
dying and his weak son will be no match for those whose hatred of
the Deryni will bring an end to the current peace. Sequel to
Saint Camber (RC 44587). Some violence. 1981.
The Cursed RC 44567
by Dave Duncan 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
4 cassettes
The few who survive "star sickness" possess magical powers that
are both helpful and destructive, but the law requires these
"cursed" individuals to be banished from the empire. Innkeeper
Gwin Solith, whose husband and children fell to the dreaded
disease, faces a dramatic change when she illegally shelters a
young stranger. Some strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 1995.
Daggerspell RC 44481
by Katharine Kerr 
read by Fred Major
3 cassettes
Tale derived from Celtic mythology. With the birth of a girl
named Jill, the sorceror Nevyn has the chance to right a wrong he
committed more than four hundred years ago when he caused the
death of two young lovers. Prequel to Darkspell 
(RC 44482). Violence, strong language, and some descriptions of
sex. 1993.
Darkspell RC 44482
by Katharine Kerr 
read by Fred Major
3 cassettes
In this sequel to Daggerspell (RC 44481), Lord Rhodry and Jill
move closer to danger as they attempt to recover the Great Stone.
And the sorcerer Nevyn can only watch and hope for the best,
since he has vowed not to interfere in their lives. Violence,
strong language, and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
Dinotopia Lost RC 43486
by Alan Dean Foster 
read by Gregory Gorton
3 cassettes
A utopian tale of Dinotopia, an island where humans and dinosaurs
live in harmony. When a pirate ship reaches its shores and the
marauding crew captures a dinosaur family, young pilot Will
Denison leads the rescuers into the perilous Rainy Basin for a
tense and fateful confrontation. 1996.
Drums of Autumn RC 43320
by Diana Gabaldon 
read by Barbara Caruso
8 cassettes
In this sequel to Voyager (RC 38591), time travelers Claire and
Jamie Fraser find themselves in South Carolina in 1767. Realizing
that the clouds of revolution are forming, they join a remote
community of Scottish immigrants and confront the perils of the
wilderness. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
The Fire Duke: Keepers of the Hidden Ways, Book One RC 43668
by Joel Rosenberg 
read by Fred Major
2 cassettes
Torrie Thorsen takes friends Maggie and Ian home to North Dakota
for college spring break. Suddenly werewolves attack the town and
carry Torrie's mother and Maggie underground to Tir Na Nog, realm
of the Fire Duke. Torrie and his father follow to rescue them
from the secret city. Some strong language. 1995.
First King of Shannara RC 43233
by Terry Brooks 
read by James DeLotel
4 cassettes
In this prequel to The Sword of Shannara (RC 11046), Bremen the
Druid, who has been expelled from Paranor for studying the
magical sciences, learns of an advancing army of trolls led by
Brona, the Warlock Lord. Bremen now struggles to unite the
peoples of the Four Lands and to find a new weapon that will foil
Brona's evil plans. 1996.
Five Hundred Years After RC 43533
by Steven Brust 
read by Erik Sandvold
4 cassettes
Phoenix guard Khaavren and his swashbuckling companions Aerich,
Tazendra, and Pel again come to the aid of the aging Emperor
Tortaalik. They face Dragonlord Adron, who schemes to claim the
throne of Dragaera for himself. But Adron's beautiful and
ambitious daughter Aliera has plans of her own. Sequel to The
Phoenix Guards (RC 43532). 1994.
Geis of the Gargoyle RC 43783
by Piers Anthony 
read by Bruce Huntey
2 cassettes
In this fantasy saga, Gary Gar must find a spell powerful enough
to preserve the purity of the Swan Knee River, which flows into
Xanth. The Good Magician Humfrey dispatches Gary to tutor an
unruly girl whose magic can locate the fabled philtre and restore
the river to a pristine state. For junior and senior high
readers. 1995.
Gold Unicorn RC 40922
by Tanith Lee 
read by June Carter
1 cassette
Sixteen-year-old Tanaquil is taken captive by the conquering army
of Empress Veriam, who turns out to be her half sister, Lizra.
Lizra has constructed a huge, mechanical, gold-plated unicorn as
a symbol of her power, but only Tanaquil's talents can make it
work. And Tanaquil finds the unicorn is much more than a machine
of war. Sequel to Black Unicorn (RC 37074). For junior and senior
high and older readers. 1994.
The Golden Compass: His Dark Materials, Book 1 RC 44343
by Philip Pullman 
read by Suzanne Toren
3 cassettes
A tale set in Victorian England on an alternate Earth. Young Lyra
Belacqua and her daemon enjoy an idyllic life among the scholars
at Jordan College. Then her friend Roger and other children are
abducted by the Gobblers. Venturing north in pursuit, Lyra
encounters an alien and sinister world. Violence. For junior and
senior high readers. 1995.
The Green Isle of the Great Deep  
RC 43482
by Neil Gunn 
read by Vanessa Maroney
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Young Art and Old Hector (RC 44406), the old
man and the little boy accidentally fall into a pond and discover
the Green Isle deep beneath the water. In this secret world, a
seemingly perfect and orderly society is achieved. However, it is
at the expense of human individuality and spiritual freedom.
1975.
Her Majesty's Wizard RC 44132
by Christopher Stasheff 
read by Erik Sandvold
3 cassettes
When postgraduate student Matthew Mantrell deciphers the runes on
an ancient parchment that he finds in the university library, he
is transported to a medieval-like world where reciting verses can
work magic. Matt is good at reciting verses, so he takes on the
job of wizard and attempts to rescue a princess from an evil
sorcerer. 1986.
King and Emperor: The Hammer and the Cross, Book 3 RC 44574
by Harry Harrison and John Holm 
read by Bruce Huntey
3 cassettes
Sequel to One King's Way (RC 41357), set during an alternate Dark
Ages. The warrior Shef has become king of the North and faces
confrontation with the Holy Roman Empire. When his invading fleet
is threatened by the dreaded Greek fire, he seeks to regain the
advantage through technological innovation. Violence. 1996.
The Last Unicorn RC 40903
by Peter S. Beagle 
read by Mimi Bederman
2 cassettes (Reissue)
A beautiful white unicorn worries that she is the last of her
species, and so sets out in search of any surviving relatives.
Accompanied by a second-rate magician and a sad, thin woman, the
unicorn has fairy-tale adventures and finds her family enslaved
by a wicked king. 1968.
The Lions of Al-Rassan RC 43861
by Guy Gavriel Kay 
read by Ed Blake
4 cassettes
In a tale evocative of medieval Spain, two exiled military
leaders of rival religious kingdoms become allies and friends. A
woman doctor falls in love with both men. When political events
pit the two warriors against each other, love and loyalty is
tested in a climactic holy war. Violence and descriptions of sex.
1995.
The Oathbound Wizard RC 44133
by Christopher Stasheff 
read by Erik Sandvold
3 cassettes
Although she loves him, Queen Alisande refuses to marry lord
wizard Matt Mantrell because he is not a king. In a moment of
anger, Matt vows to win a kingdom by overthrowing a neighboring
tyrant. Bound by his oath, Matt gathers together his magic and
minions in an attempt to conquer the vile sorcerer-king,
Gordogrosso. Sequel to Her Majesty's Wizard (RC 44132). 1993.
Out of This World: Three Worlds Trilogy, Book 1 RC 44629
by Lawrence Watt-Evans 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
Inhabitants from two alternate universes travel to Earth to
enlist help against the evil Shadow, who threatens to conquer
both of their worlds. When Amy and Pel go to investigate the
story, they find themselves pursued by Shadow and stranded in the
Galactic Empire. Some strong language and some descriptions 
of sex. 1993.
The Phoenix Guards RC 43532
by Steven Brust 
read by Erik Sandvold
3 cassettes
In this prequel to Five Hundred Years After (RC 43533), four
young warriors set out to join the emperor's elite guards. The
quartet become enmeshed in sorcery, intrigue, and a plot to
overthrow the monarch. Their fast wits, adroit swordplay, and
blind luck see them through. Violence. 1991.
Rise of a Merchant Prince: Serpentwar Saga, Volume 2 RC 44241
by Raymond E. Feist 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes
Erik von Darkmoor and Rupert Avery have warned the rulers of the
Sauur's drive to enslave the entire population of Midkemia, and
they are free to pursue their own interests. Erik remains in the
army while Rupert strives to become a wealthy merchant. Sequel to
Shadow of a Dark Queen (RC 41872). Some strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 1995.
Sabriel RC 44682
by Garth Nix 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Sabriel was sent to school outside the Old Kingdom for her
safety. Now in her last year of study, she receives her father's
necromancy tools, indicating that he is dead. Determined to find
his body, Sabriel reenters the Old Kingdom and confronts the evil
forces of life and death. Some violence. For junior and senior
high readers. 1995.
Saint Camber: The Legends of Camber of Culdi, Volume 2 RC 44587
by Katherine Kurtz 
read by Erik Sandvold
3 cassettes
Although Camber has seen to the overthrow of Imre and the return
of a Haldane king, Cinhil, to the throne of Gwynedd, he still
cannot rest. Imre's sister Ariella is plotting to overthrow
Cinhil. But Cinhil resents having been taken from his monastic
studies and is not inclined to listen to Camber. Sequel to Camber
of Culdi (RC 44586). Some violence. 1978.
The Ship of Ishtar RC 44420
by A. Merritt 
read by Ted Stoddard
2 cassettes
While convalescing from injuries sustained in World War I, John
Kenton receives a mysterious block of stone from an archaeologist
whose work he is supporting. Upon cracking open the stone, he
suddenly finds himself on the deck of a Babylonian ship
accompanied by the priestess of Ishtar and the priests of Nergal.
Some strong language and some violence. 1924.
Stone of Tears: The Sword of Truth, Book 2 RC 41792
by Terry Goodkind 
read by Nick Sullivan
7 cassettes
In this sequel to Wizard's First Rule 
(RC 41067), reluctant sorcerer Richard Cypher discovers that the
evil Darken Rahl was his father. At Rahl's death the veil to the
underworld was torn, threatening to make the world a living hell.
Richard's destiny is to repair the veil-but at a terrible price.
Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Stranger at the Wedding RC 45093
by Barbara Hambly 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
In a land like eighteenth-century England, Kyra, a student
wizard, has been estranged from her father for six years because
of her interest in magic. Through visions, Kyra discovers that
her sister Alix's life will end on her wedding night. Returning
home, Kyra tries to stop the spells that threaten Alix. Some
violence. 1994.
The Tangle Box RC 44690
by Terry Brooks 
read by James DeLotel
3 cassettes
Ben Holiday, sovereign of the Magic Kingdom of Landover, allows
confidence-man Horris Kew to return from exile on Earth. But
Horris has become the unwitting dupe of the evil sorcerer Gorse,
who plans to enslave the fairy folk of Landover and imprison Ben
and his companions in the Tangle Box. Sequel to Wizard at Large
(RC 33053). 1994.
Ticktock RC 44204
by Dean Koontz 
read by James DeLotel
2 cassettes
Thirty-year-old novelist Tommy Phan arrives home one day to find
a mysterious rag doll at his front door. That night Tommy hears
strange noises coming from the doll, which springs to life and
turns its diabolical powers on him. Tommy flees in desperation to
escape the fiend's clutches. Bestseller 1996.
Towing Jehovah RC 43408
by James Morrow 
read by Ray Hagen
3 cassettes
God has died and fallen into the sea. With that news, sea captain
Anthony Van Horne is recruited by a grieving Archangel Raphael to
tow God's colossal corpse to a remote Arctic cave for burial. As
Van Horne pursues the mission with his motley crew, he confronts
a series of setbacks that satirize aspects of modern society.
Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1994.
Waking the Moon RC 43484
by Elizabeth Hand 
read by Mary Kane
4 cassettes
At a Washington, D.C., university, six freshmen explore the
limits of freedom, friendship, and sex-until one makes a terrible
discovery. The university is a haven of the Benandanti, an order
that secretly controls the world through ancient magic. The
students come to understand that their own lives and fates are
enmeshed with the order. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
1995.
When the Bough Breaks RC 43402
by Mercedes Lackey and Holly Lisle 
read by Gregory Gorton
2 cassettes
Elves and humans combine around Amanda, a sexually abused girl
who is endowed with Psi, a powerful telekinetic ability. Amanda
harbors multiple personalities, as well as the spirit of an
ancient witch, Cethlenn, who manages to rescue Amanda and punish
her abuser. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex.
1993.
Winds of Fate: The Mage Winds, Book 1  RC 44392
by Mercedes Lackey 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
Lackey returns to her kingdom of Valdemar with this account of
Herald Elspeth's search for a mage who can teach her both to use
and to deflect the power of magic in order to save her country
from Ancar of Hardorn. Prequel to Winds of Change (RC 44393).
Strong language, some violence, and some descriptions of sex.
1991.
Yon Ill Wind RC 44655
by Piers Anthony 
read by Bruce Huntey
2 cassettes
Wanting to become the top demon of his realm, Xanth accepts a
wager with unusual restrictions. Now called Nimby and with the
body of a dragon and the head of an ass, he must remain
incognito, speak only once, remain with the first creature he
meets, and make that creature shed one tear. His task is
complicated when a hurricane blows a human family into his realm.
1996.
General
The Actual RC 44636
by Saul Bellow 
read by James DeLotel
1 cassette
Semiretired Harry Trellman, a man alienated from life and love,
is abruptly hired to join the "brain trust" of a billionaire.
There Harry reencounters the flame of his youth, who is now
divorced and widowed. In a testimonial of hope, Harry seeks to
reclaim his lost love. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
The Adventurers RC 44275
by Harold Robbins 
read by Chuck Young
5 cassettes
Chronicle of the life of Diogenes Alejandro Xenos, known to most
as Dax, a strong man both feared and loved by men and women, a
man whose favor is sought by many. His is a tale of revolutions,
high finance, and high fashion on an international playground.
Strong language and explicit descriptions of sex. 1966.
The Age of Consent RC 43481
by Geoffrey Wolff 
read by Michele Schaeffer
2 cassettes
Ted and Maisie are brought up in upstate New York in an idyllic
utopian community, which their parents joined in the 1960s. At
age fifteen, Maisie leaps from a rock into a shallow pool,
causing permanent injuries. Distraught, Ted struggles to find the
reason for his sister's act and gradually discovers dark secrets
of incest and sexual abuse. Strong language and descriptions of
sex. 1995.
Albion's Story RC 43534
by Kate Grenville 
read by John Lescault
2 cassettes
Albion Gidley Singer, who is socially awkward and neurotic, grows
up to inherit his father's lucrative business. When the
misogynist Singer marries, fate delivers him a strong-willed
daughter. As years unfold, the two are doomed to a mutually
destructive struggle for dominance. Descriptions of sex. 1994.
The Anatomy Lesson RC 43119
by John David Morley 
read by Christopher Walker
1 cassette
Kiddo, a college and social dropout, lives on the dole in
Amsterdam, mourning the premature death of his brother, Morton.
Honoring Morton's final request, Kiddo witnesses the autopsy and
begins a painful discovery of the darker side of his brother's
life. Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Ancestral Truths RC 43076
by Sara Maitland 
read by Janis Gray
3 cassettes
Clare Kerslake has lost her right hand- and David, her cruel male
companion of eight years-in a mountain-climbing accident. She
cannot remember what happened that day and is terrified that she
might have killed David. And Clare must learn to deal with "the
hand," her much-despised prosthesis. Some strong language and
some descriptions of sex. 1993.
Babel Tower RC 42872
by A.S. Byatt 
read by Laura Giannarelli
5 cassettes
In mid-1960s England, an unhappily married Frederica lives in a
country manor isolated from her Cambridge friends. After she
flees with her son to make a new life, she becomes the focus of a
court case over custody of her son and involved in an obscenity
case for her part in publishing a lurid novel. Strong language.
1996.
Beachcombing for a Shipwrecked God  RC 42938
by Joe Coomer 
read by Laura Giannarelli
2 cassettes
Three women share life aboard an ocean yacht in New Hampshire.
The recently widowed Charlotte has fled her Kentucky in-laws and
lands on a boat belonging to Grace, an elderly widow. Already
aboard is Chloe, a sweet, plump teenage dropout with an abusive
boyfriend. The beleaguered women escape to Nova Scotia across
open ocean. 1995.
The Bestseller RC 43428
by Olivia Goldsmith 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
4 cassettes
When, after countless rejections from publishers, first-time
author Terry O'Neil kills herself, her mother vows to get Terry's
huge manuscript into print. Intertwined are stories of other
authors and publishers hoping they have a book that will make the
bestseller list. Strong language and explicit descriptions of
sex. Bestseller 1996.
A Better Place RC 43282
by Barbara Hall 
read by Mimi Bederman
2 cassettes
As a girl, Valerie Caldwell was the belle of every ball in
Maddock, Virginia. Now, after fourteen years as an aspiring movie
star in Los Angeles, she returns home, hoping to recapture the
joys of her youth. But things there have changed, and Valerie's
return disrupts and alters the lives of her family and friends.
Strong language. 1994.
A Book of Common Prayer RC 44419
by Joan Didion 
read by Laura Giannarelli
2 cassettes
A contemporary American woman who has survived two disastrous
marriages becomes caught in the inner conflicts of the
aristocracy of a Central American country. Some strong language.
1977.
The Bookmakers RC 44085
by Zev Chafets 
read by Randy Wieck
2 cassettes
When Mack Green brazenly foils an attempted holdup, the
burned-out writer realizes he wants to die. So he proposes
writing a suicide diary of his final year, his agent likes the
idea, and Mack's offbeat project begins. But Mack finds love and
a reason to live, and the scheme goes awry. Strong language.
1995.
But I Love You Anyway RC 40967
by Sara Lewis 
read by Anne Mullen
2 cassettes
Fortyish, once widowed, and once divorced, Mimi is a partner with
her sister, Eve, in a copy business. She is dealing with a lot:
her dislike for Eve's new husband, who is being investigated for
stealing from his last job; competition that threatens the
business; a needy ex-husband; two kids; and a much younger
suitor. Some strong language. 1996.
BUtterfield 8 RC 44130
by John O'Hara 
read by John Stratton
2 cassettes
Inspired by a New York murder case and set in Prohibition-era
Manhattan of the early 1930s, this novel revolves around the
sensational lives of the seedy characters who inhabit the
speakeasies and underground clubs of New York's upper East Side.
Principal among the cast is Gloria Wandrous, who is on a doomed
quest for love. Some strong language. 1935.
Carolina Moon RC 45184
by Jill McCorkle 
read by Nanette Savard
2 cassettes
Life in the small, sleepy town of Fulton, North Carolina, is not
as serene as it appears. Quee Purdy is busy operating a
stop-smoking clinic while giving out advice and solving the
murder of one of the locals. 1996.
Changing Places: A Tale of Two Campuses RC 44106
by David Lodge 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
Two English professors exchange posts and alter the lives of each
other's colleagues, students, and wives in this prequel to Small
World (RC 44105). Morris Zapp is from the prestigious and moneyed
Euphoric State located near California; Phillip Swallow is from
modest and middling Rummidge situated in the industrial English
Midlands. Some strong language and some descriptions of sex.
1975.
Chasing Cézanne RC 44634
by Peter Mayle 
read by Fred Major
2 cassettes
Andre Kelly, a freelance photographer for DQ magazine, is in
France to photograph a Russian woman's icons. While there he
decides to visit an old friend. He arrives and discovers his
friend is not at home, but the hired man seems to be removing a
Cézanne painting. Kelly follows and finds himself involved in an
art-forgery scam. Bestseller 1997.
Cheap Ticket to Heaven RC 44891
by Charlie Smith 
read by Barbara Pinolini
3 cassettes
After Clare springs husband Jack from prison, the couple sets off
on a violent and destructive spree through the South and Midwest.
Driven by memories of dysfunctional childhoods and dreams of
revenge, the pair is drawn into a bloody family feud. Strong
language, violence, and descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Christmas Mystery RC 43882
by Jostein Gaarder 
read by Michele Schaeffer
1 cassette
Young Joachim's father buys him a dusty, old Advent calendar with
little doors to open each day until Christmas. Behind the first
door, Joachim finds a note that begins the story of a little girl
who travels back in time to the Nativity. On Christmas Eve, the
tale magically blends into the present and a contemporary
miracle. 1996.
Death in the Andes RC 43874
by Mario Vargas Llosa 
read by Peter Gil
2 cassettes
When three men vanish from a remote mountain village, two
Peruvian soldiers are sent to search. In their efforts to solve
the disappearances, the troopers encounter the horrors of human
sacrifice, cannibalism, and guerrilla violence. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Discovery of Heaven RC 44282
by Harry Mulisch 
read by Christopher Hurt
5 cassettes
A philosophical tale that traces the lives and thoughts of two
improbable friends, astronomer Max and linguist Onno, over thirty
years. The son that Max fathers with Onno's wife is actually
God's emissary, who is sent into the world to recover the tablets
bearing the Ten Commandments after God's contract with man has
failed. Strong language. 1996.
The Dream Merchants RC 44552
by Harold Robbins 
read by James DeLotel
4 cassettes
This tale of the American movie industry chronicles the rise of
Johnny Edge, a pioneer Hollywood moviemaker, and the men and
women who sold their souls and their bodies for a piece of the
action. Strong language and explicit descriptions of sex. 1949.
The Driver's Seat RC 44691
by Muriel Spark 
read by Anne Flosnik
1 cassette
Lise leaves her office, shops, closes up her apartment, and heads
for the airport. In the process she buys clothing, makes scenes,
follows one man onto the plane, and is herself followed by a
second man. Her destination is a foreign city-and ultimately her
own murder. Some violence. 1970.
The Drowning Room RC 43712
by Michael Pye 
read by Faith Potts
2 cassettes
Recreates the adventurous life of Gretje Reyniers, a
seventeenth-century Dutch woman. Orphaned at twelve, she resorts
to begging, prostitution, and an unappealing marriage. Then she
absconds with her sailor lover to New Amsterdam, where she
amasses wealth and her lover eventually dies. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Edisto Revisited RC 43175
by Padgett Powell 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
1 cassette
In this sequel to Edisto (RC 20773), Simons Manigault returns
home after graduating from Clemson with an architectural degree.
But Simons has no plans to seek gainful employment-instead he
finds ways to while away his summer. He begins by having an
affair with his first cousin. Some strong language. 1996.
The Empress of One RC 43889
by Faith Sullivan 
read by Michele Schaeffer
3 cassettes
Young Sally Wheeler's life is overshadowed by her mother's
chronic depression. Sally struggles to forge a stable life, but
the strain affects her behavior and grades at school. Blessed
with a talent for drama, she writes and stages a play in which
she expresses her feelings. 1996.
Galatea 2.2 RC 43800
by Richard Powers 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes
Humanist author Richard Powers is recruited by cognitive
neurologist Philip Lentz to train a computer neural net to pass a
university comprehensive exam in English literature. The team
succeeds in developing their highbrow processor, which not only
meets expectations, but begins thinking for itself. 1995.
The Good Husband RC 44444
by Gail Godwin 
read by Michele Schaeffer
3 cassettes
Magda Danvers, a noted English professor, looks to what she can
learn from her "final teacher," advanced ovarian cancer. As she
and her husband test their relationship, so do another couple who
are reeling from the loss of a baby son. Strong language and
explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.
The Great Longing RC 43531
by Marcel Möring 
read by Phil Regensdorf
2 cassettes
Sam van Dijk lost all memory of his childhood up to age twelve,
when his parents died in a car wreck. Now, as a young adult, Sam
is reunited with his brother and sister, who help him recover his
past. With that, Sam is able to pursue his "great longing" for
identity and love. Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1995.
The Hand I Fan With RC 43943
by Tina McElroy Ansa 
read by Saidah Arrika Ekulona
3 cassettes
In this sequel to Baby of the Family 
(RC 31112), Lena McPherson is forty-five and a much-admired
successful businesswoman in Mulberry, Georgia. Her ability to
gaze into people's souls hampers her love life until she conjures
up Herman, a man who died a hundred years ago. Explicit
descriptions of sex and some strong language. 1996.
Hearing Voices RC 44123
by A.N. Wilson 
read by John Horton
2 cassettes
This sequel to Daughters of Albion 
(RC 35723) opens in the mid-1960s as wealthy Virgil Everett, avid
collector of the Lampitt papers, plunges to his death from a
skyscraper. Thirty years later, Julian Ramsay's memory
regressions link Everett's death to Lampitt's own. Some strong
language. 1996.
Hollywood Kids RC 43946
by Jackie Collins 
read by Kimberly Schraf
4 cassettes
Spoiled offspring of dysfunctional Hollywood families share love
and adventure. Jordanna Levitt, a movie producer's daughter,
assists handsome, cruel movie-star Bobby Rush. Cheryl Landers
runs a call-girl service with Grant Lennon, a struggling agent.
Then an ex-convict turns on the heat. Strong language, explicit
descriptions of sex, and some violence. Bestseller 1994.
If This World Were Mine RC 45016
by E. Lynn Harris 
read by Robin Miles
2 cassettes
Four black graduates of Hampton Institute continue their
friendship through monthly meetings of a journal-keeping support
group. For almost twenty years, Yolanda, Dwight, Leland, and
Riley help each other through marriage, love, sexual identity,
and work crises until the group is strained to the breaking
point. Strong language and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
In the Place of Fallen Leaves RC 43360
by Tim Pears 
read by Patricia Kilgarriff
3 cassettes
The story of thirteen-year-old Alison, the youngest child of a
Devon, England, farm family during the summer drought of 1984. As
Alison is awakening to love, sexuality, and life's mysteries, her
disabled grandmother reveals to her the tragic and sordid history
of her family's past. 1993.
The Inhabited Woman RC 43456
by Gioconda Belli 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
3 cassettes
Aristocrat Lavinia Alarcón returns to her Latin American home to
begin work after her university studies in Italy. At first an
apolitical yuppie, she is gradually drawn into a guerilla
movement under the influence of a fifteenth-century female rebel,
whose spirit resides at Lavinia's home. Descriptions of sex.
1994.
Keeper of the House RC 43104
by Rebecca T. Godwin 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
A maid's forty-year chronicle of life in an infamous South
Carolina brothel. Sent there in 1929 to work as a housekeeper at
age fourteen, Minyon Manigault tells of the powerful clients, the
prostitutes, and the white madam, whom Minyon eventually succeeds
as "keeper of the house." Strong language and descriptions of
sex. 1994.
Larry's Party RC 44816
by Carol Shields 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Middle-aged and twice-divorced, Larry Weller designs garden
mazes, in which he finds security, as they offer a "nest of
softness" and the "rapture of being blindly led." At a dinner
party with his sister and ex-wives, Larry becomes aware of his
perplexity with life. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
Last Orders RC 44117
by Graham Swift 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
Three British World War II veterans and drinking mates set out to
fulfill a friend's dying request: that his ashes be scattered
into the sea at Margate. En route, the men reflect on love, war,
marriage, and business, as they reveal the failed hopes of their
own lives. Strong language. 1996.
The Legend of the Barefoot Mailman  RC 44246
by John Henry Fleming 
read by David Palmer
2 cassettes
After a failed foray into the citrus business in the late 1800s,
immigrant Josef Steinmetz is hired to carry the mail to beach
homes in Figulus, Florida. As he treads the sweltering sands
barefoot, Steinmetz encounters unfriendly Seminoles, pirates, and
wild animals to become a living myth and a boon to the tourist
trade. 1995.
The Letter RC 44841
by Richard Paul Evans 
read by Barry Bernson
2 cassettes
In this companion to Timepiece 
(RC 43227) and The Christmas Box 
(RC 43556), a woman leaves a letter at the grave of Andrea
Parkin, daughter of David and MaryAnne Parkin. As David comes to
grips with the contents of the letter, he must also deal with
MaryAnne's departure from his life. Bestseller 1997.
Live at Five RC 43206
by David Haynes 
read by L.J. Ganser
2 cassettes
Middle-class African American Brandon Wilson anchors a TV
newscast in the Twin Cities. His producer decides that Wilson
isn't "black" enough and has him "go back to the streets" to
cover the horrors of ghetto life. But there Wilson finds a
different story from what his boss envisioned. Strong language.
1996.
Lost Laysen RC 43670
by Margaret Mitchell 
read by David Palmer
1 cassette
A biographical introduction and a novella, both presenting
Mitchell writings first unveiled in 1995. The introduction
includes letters from the Gone with the Wind (RC 33082) author to
unsuccessful suitor Henry Love Angel. The novella, 
set in the South Pacific, tells of a feisty female missionary,
her devoted suitor, and a smitten sailor. Bestseller 1996.
Lucky You RC 45006
by Carl Hiaasen 
read by Nanette Savard
3 cassettes
JoLayne Luck's fortune turns when she hits a multimillion-dollar
lottery. Also holding the winning number are a pair of white
supremacists who lose their own lucky ticket and steal JoLayne's.
Desperate to realize her dream of buying an endangered turtle
colony, she pursues the thieves. Strong language. Bestseller
1997.
Lying on the Couch RC 44897
by Irvin D. Yalom 
read by John Stratton
3 cassettes
When therapist Ernest Lash counsels a man to end his marriage,
the jilted wife blames Lash. A bright and comely lawyer, the
woman becomes Lash's patient, planning to seduce him and ruin his
career. Her scheme goes awry and yields unexpected results.
Strong language and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Madeleine's Ghost RC 43156
by Robert Girardi 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
3 cassettes
Ned Conti, thirty-two, from New Orleans, lives in a haunted New
York apartment while working on his dissertation and trying to
forget his ex-girlfriend. He takes a temporary job as a
researcher for Father Rose, who is looking for evidence to
declare a former nun a saint. As his worlds converge, Ned becomes
involved in seances, suicides, miracles, and mummies. Some strong
language. 1995.
Maggie Cassidy RC 43932
by Jack Kerouac 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
2 cassettes
A story of high school life and love in a New England mill town
in 1939. Evokes the exuberance and anguish of adolescent romance,
the joys of competitive sports, and the thrill of youthful
adventures. Strong language. 1959.
Make Lemonade RC 40705
by Virginia Euwer Wolff 
read by Celeste Lawson
1 cassette
As a first step toward earning money for college,
fourteen-year-old LaVaughn answers an ad for a baby-sitter.
Jolly, a seventeen-year-old mother of two who does factory work
in the evenings, offers LaVaughn the job. Then Jolly is fired,
and LaVaughn learns how to "take hold," as her mother says, of
her own plans, of Jolly's situation, and of the children's needs
as they all work on lessons in and out of school. For high school
and older readers. 1993.
The Man Who Loved Children  
RC 44559
by Christina Stead 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
4 cassettes (Reissue)
Classic story of hypocrisy and evil that probes human nature.
Egocentric Sam Pollit, a government scientist; his careworn
second wife, Henny; and six children are the characters in this
family tragedy. Originally published in 1940. 1995.
Martin Dressler: The Tale of an American Dreamer RC 43648
by Steven Millhauser 
read by Dick Jenkins
2 cassettes
From a boy working in his father's New York City cigar shop in
the late 1800s, Martin Dressler rises to the pinnacle of
entrepreneurial success during the early 1900s. His vision leads
him to build the Grand Cosmo, the ultimate hotel, retail center,
and theme park. Only later does he realize that "he had dreamed
the wrong dream." 1996.
Memoir from Antproof Case RC 43802
by Mark Helprin 
read by Fred Major
3 cassettes
Fictional autobiography of an American octagenarian who resides
with his much younger wife and son in Brazil. As a Harvard grad,
World War II fighter pilot, and investment banker, he epitomizes
success in the twentieth century. Yet his deep aversion for
coffee has brought him trouble and anguish. Strong language.
1995.
Memoirs of a Geisha RC 45008
by Arthur Golden 
read by Yolande Bavan
4 cassettes
A fictionalized account of the life of a typical geisha in Japan
in the 1930s and 1940s. Sayuri recalls how as a nine-year-old she
and her sister are sold to a geisha house as their mother lies
dying. From then on Sayuri learns the traditional exotic arts for
pleasing men. Bestseller 1997.
Middle Son RC 44379
by Deborah Iida 
read by Robert Sams
2 cassettes
The story of a Japanese family with three sons on a Hawaiian
sugar plantation. The youngest son is given to childless
relatives and the eldest boy drowns, leaving their mother
distraught. As his mother lies dying, the middle son reveals the
truth of his brother's death and the tragic consequences of
custom and tradition. 1996.
Midnight Lemonade RC 41731
by Ann Goethe 
read by Celeste Lawson
2 cassettes
Sister Helena never prepared the poetic Katherine for real life.
As a Catholic schoolgirl, Katherine had imagined a dreamy life as
a wife and mother. When her handsome professor husband turns to
yet another woman, no amount of alcohol can soothe Katherine's
sorrow. The needs of her three children press closer and the
strong southern woman pulls herself together with humor and grit.
Explicit descriptions of sex and some strong language. 1993.
Missing Angel Juan RC 41977
by Francesca Lia Block 
read by Jennifer Mendenhall
2 cassettes
Suddenly Angel Juan is leaving for New York to find his own
music. He doesn't want Witch Baby to write his songs, and she is
afraid he doesn't want her around at all. But he is her soul
mate, and she goes to dark, dangerous New York to find him. There
the spirit of Charlie Bat helps her to learn about holding on and
holding within. Sequel to Cherokee Bat and the Goat Guys (RC
37032). Some descriptions of sex. For senior high and older
readers. 1993.
The Mulching of America RC 44051
by Harry Crews 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
Traveling soap salesman Hickum Looney wins the annual sales
contest that his tyrannical boss has dominated for twenty-five
years. As his reward, Looney is degraded and ejected near-naked
into the parking lot, where his life takes a bizarre turn for the
better. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Nathan's Run RC 43498
by John Gilstrap 
read by John Stratton
2 cassettes
Nathan, an orphaned and abused twelve-year-old, is sentenced to a
detention center, where he kills a guard in self-defense. Nathan
escapes and is relentlessly pursued by police, as well as by a
hit man. While on the lam, the boy finds unlikely allies in a
conservative talk-show host and a cop. Strong language. 1996.
Nightlines RC 42477
by Neil Jordan 
read by John Lescault
2 cassettes
As Donal Gore awaits execution in a Madrid prison, he is
sustained by memories of night fishing with his father back in
Ireland. Unexpectedly freed, Donal returns home, betrays his
pledge to the IRA, and enters into a love affair with his
stepmother-despite the presence of his paralyzed father.
"Betrayal seeds itself, like a weed through a garden," reflects
Donal in this story of love and politics. 1994.
No Reck'ning Made RC 40929
by Joanne Greenberg 
read by Ardyth Heller
2 cassettes
When her mother dies, Clara knows that she must find a way to
stay in school to overcome poverty and the stigma of being from
the gulch. She earns a teaching certificate and is hired by Gold
Flume, a mining town much like her home. Clara works hard to
create a haven where children can learn and gain self-respect.
After decades of success, she faces a fight for her job when
wealthy and demanding outsiders move to the area. Some
descriptions of sex. 1993.
Now I Know Everything RC 43390
by Andrew Postman 
read by Christopher Walker
2 cassettes
Andrew, a would-be novelist, is hired by a famous women's
magazine as a columnist to report on romance and sex from 
a "sensitive" man's perspective. As columnist "Vince," his
popularity among women soars while, paradoxically, his love
life-potential "material" for his column-founders. Strong
language and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Objects in Mirror Are Closer Than They Appear RC 43375
by Katharine Weber 
read by Faith Potts
2 cassettes
At twenty-six, photographer Harriet Rose has established her
career and has found her true love. Traveling to Geneva, she
stays with her old friend, Anne, whom Harriet finds much changed,
involved with a married man, and headed for disaster. Harriet is
faced with the delicate task of rescuing a reluctant victim.
Strong language. 1995.
The Ordinary Seaman RC 44623
by Francisco Goldman 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
3 cassettes
Fifteen Nicaraguan men are recruited to crew the damaged cargo
ship Urus, moored at a Brooklyn pier. They soon realize that they
have been abandoned there without money or legal status. One of
the men, who ventures into the city seeking help for his
comrades, finds both love and tragedy. Strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1997.
Outer Dark RC 43924
by Cormac McCarthy 
read by Pam Ward
2 cassettes
A bleak tale of incest set in Appalachia around 1900. After
fathering his sister's baby, a man abandons the infant in the
woods and flees. As the frantic mother sets out on a relentless
search for the child, she is pursued through the forest by three
mysterious strangers. Strong language and violence. 1968.
Paradise RC 44917
by Abdulrazak Gurnah 
read by Ed Blake
2 cassettes
When he is sent to live with his "uncle" Aziz, twelve-year-old
Yusuf is unaware that his father has sold him into slavery to pay
off a debt. He works in Aziz's shop and then travels across East
Africa with a trade caravan. Yusuf comes of age in an atmosphere
of cultural tensions among African Muslims, Indian traders, and
European colonists. Some strong language. 1994.
The Partisan RC 41909
by Benjamin Cheever 
read by John Lescault
2 cassettes
Nelson, a film student in New York, and his sister, Narcissus,
are wards of Jonas and Elspeth Collingwood. Jonas is a novelist
who, with eighteen books in print, dries up when a publisher
offers him a large advance to write a war memoir. Nelson becomes
the storyteller, hoping to free up Jonas's block. 1993.
Peregrine's Rest RC 44477
by Jennifer Gostin 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Hesper Dance, nearing forty, begins her new life as resident
caretaker of Peregrine's Rest, a small historic cemetery. When
she sets about cataloging and restoring the unkempt burial
ground, some local residents view her as a threat and plot to
close down the cemetery that has become her life's purpose. 1996.
Play It as It Lays RC 43391
by Joan Didion 
read by Barbara Pinolini
1 cassette
A discursive story set in late 1960s Hollywood about an actress
whose immoderate lifestyle has alienated her from family and
friends. She witnesses a friend's suicide and enters a mental
hospital, where she recollects some of the formative events in
her life. Strong language. 1970.
Prizes RC 43306
by Erich Segal 
read by Faith Potts
3 cassettes
Adam Coopersmith is a caring physician whose genetic research
brings him to the nation's capital to save the life of a "senior
Washington personage." Sandy Raven is a gerontological researcher
whose work has left his personal life on the brink of disaster.
Isabel da Costa, a child prodigy, is a brilliant physicist whose
father dominates her life. Each aspires to win a Nobel Prize. One
will die in the process. Strong language. 1995.
The Puttermesser Papers RC 45082
by Cynthia Ozick 
read by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
Ruth Puttermesser is ousted from her job, but a golem she creates
from the soil in her flowerpots helps her become mayor of New
York City. The creature turns troublesome and eventually has to
be destroyed. Ruth's love life, modeled on that of George Eliot,
does not work out until after her death. But even then Ruth
discovers that Paradise is not what she expected. Some violence.
1997.
The Rapture of Canaan RC 44391
by Sheri Reynolds 
read by Michele Schaeffer
2 cassettes
Ninah Huff's Grandpa Herman, minister of the Church of Fire and
Brimstone and God's Almighty Baptizing Wind, maintains control
over the entire community in an isolated part of South Carolina.
But Ninah, fourteen, finds herself pregnant by her prayer partner
James, fifteen, because they believe they are following God's
command. Some strong language. Bestseller 1995.
Reef RC 40950
by Romesh Gunesekera 
read by Ray Dizefalo
1 cassette
This Booker Prize finalist is set in Sri Lanka beginning in 1962
when Triton is an eleven-year-old boy. He relates his arrival at
the home of Ranjan Salgado, a marine biologist studying the coral
reefs. Triton learns to cook and clean-lessons that will serve
him well later in life. As political unrest becomes serious in
Sri Lanka, Salgado and Triton leave their island paradise behind
and travel to England. 1994.
Seeing Calvin Coolidge in a Dream  
RC 43850
by John Derbyshire 
read by Ed Blake
2 cassettes
Chai is living the good life with his wife, Ding, and daughter,
Hetty, in suburban New York, having survived a difficult time as
a Red Guard in China during the Great Cultural Revolution. Chai
undergoes a midlife crisis, however, when a former lover
reappears, and Ding must scheme to bring back her wayward
husband. 1996.
The Shadow Bride RC 43616
by Roy Heath 
read by Yolande Bavan
3 cassettes
Betta Singh, a Guyanese-born physician of Indian descent, works
as a government doctor fighting malaria on a plantation in
Guyana. His domineering, wealthy Hindu mother is angered by her
son's idealistic aspirations and his marriage to a Muslim. She
herself lives in luxury until she eventually loses her fortune to
a conniving Hindu holy man. 1988.
The Sharpshooter Blues RC 43569
by Lewis Nordan 
read by John Polk
2 cassettes
When two out-of-towners are shot in the general store of a sleepy
Southern town, folks assume it was Morgan, the Texas-trained
sharpshooter. In truth, it was the slow-witted Hydro. But the
tragedy transforms several of the town's idiosyncratic
characters. Some violence and some strong language. 1995.
So Big RC 44189
by Edna Ferber 
read by Jill Ferris
2 cassettes (Reissue)
A farm woman's indomitable spirit and quick response to beauty
are unquenched by years of hardship-all for the sake of her son.
Pulitzer Prize. Originally published in 1924. 1995.
Solar Storms RC 43726
by Linda Hogan 
read by Mary Kane
3 cassettes
Seventeen-year-old Angela Jensen returns from her Oklahoma foster
home to her birthplace, a desolate Indian village in northern
Minnesota. There she joins with four generations of Native
American women on a canoe voyage to their ancestral homeland,
which is threatened by a hydroelectric dam project. 1995.
A Spanish Lover RC 44368
by Joanna Trollope 
read by Corrie James
3 cassettes
The similarities between British twins Lizzie and Frances end
with their physical resemblance. As Lizzie enjoys the success of
family and career, she criticizes Frances for remaining
unmarried. Just when Frances begins to find fulfillment with her
married Spanish lover, Lizzie's stable life begins to crumble.
1993.
The Story of B RC 43863
by Daniel Quinn 
read by Gordon Gould
3 cassettes
In this companion to Ishmael (RC 35383), Father Jared Osborne is
dispatched to investigate a suspected Antichrist, known as B. As
he engages B in dialogue, Osborne learns that B's tenets have
less to do with God and spirituality than with man's
responsibility to nature and the survival of the world. 1996.
The Street Lawyer RC 45550
by John Grisham 
read by Christopher Hurt
2 cassettes
At thirty-two, Michael is on the fast track to become a partner
in his prestigious Washington law firm, but that changes the day
he is held hostage by a homeless man. Disillusioned by the
realization that his firm had illegally evicted the man, Michael
quits his job to work for the homeless. Some strong language and
some violence. Bestseller 1998.
Suspects RC 43807
by Thomas Berger 
read by Ray Foushee
2 cassettes
When Donna Howland and her young daughter are found bludgeoned,
Donna's unfaithful husband is fingered as the killer. But as the
circle of bizarre suspects widens, the bungling police force is
stretched to solve the case amid the lunacy. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Tales out of School RC 40944
by Benjamin Taylor 
read by Phil Regensdorf
2 cassettes
A novel of moods and mysticism set on Galveston Island at the
turn of the century. After building a fortune with a brewing
company, the Jewish Mehmel family is in decline.
Fourteen-year-old Felix, a Latin scholar, is the heir to the
business, but he is a dreamy child. Complex characters populate
the story, none more enigmatic than the ragged Russian emigrant
Schmulowicz. Some strong language and some descriptions of sex.
1995.
Tristessa RC 44155
by Jack Kerouac 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
1 cassette
A rambling story relating an American's stuporous escapades in
the slums of Mexico City in 1952. This stream-of-consciousness
tale interweaves observations of a rooster, a cat, a chihuahua
dog, and a ravished drug addict in homes, shops, and on the
streets of the city. 1960.
The Unusual Life of Tristan Smith  
RC 43581
by Peter Carey 
read by Fred Major
3 cassettes
Set in the fictitious nation of Efica, this picaresque story
traces the childhood of Tristan, a hideously deformed dwarf and
son of a famous actress. Tristan's life is a process of losing
his mother, searching for his father, and seeking self-acceptance
and a place in the world. Strong language and descriptions of
sex. 1994.
V. RC 43066
by Thomas Pynchon 
read by Fred Major
4 cassettes
A wild, discursive tale of two men and 
an unknown woman called "V." Benny Profane, inveterate victim, is
set in contrast to the young adventurer called Stencil, whose
life quest is to discover the identity of V., whose initial
appears in his dead father's journal. Some strong language and
some violence. 1963.



Van Gogh's Bad Café: A Love Story  
RC 44317
by Frederic Tuten 
read by Ed Blake
1 cassette
Dream-like tale of a young morphine-addicted woman who becomes
Vincent van Gogh's lover. She steps through a wall and forward in
time to explore the alien world of late-twentieth-century New
York. But a lingering concern about van Gogh returns her to him.
Strong language and violence. Bestseller 1997.
Vendetta: Lucky's Revenge RC 43478
by Jackie Collins 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
Sicilians never forget someone who causes them trouble, and Donna
Bonnatti Landsman has plans for Lucky Santangelo, who now owns
Panther Studios. Donna's determination to take over the company
leads to murder and revenge. Sequel to Lady Boss (RC 31989).
Strong language, explicit descriptions of sex, and some violence.
Bestseller 1997.
Virgin Heat RC 45117
by Laurence Shames 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Mafioso Paul Amaro has just finished a nine-year prison term. The
man who fingered him has a new identity as Ziggy Maxx and is
bartending in Key West. Paul's daughter Angelina fell in love
with Ziggy before the betrayal and still yearns for him.
Recognizing his altered appearance in a home video, Angelina
heads for Florida, trailing relatives behind her. Strong
language. 1997.
A Watch in the Night RC 44114
by A.N. Wilson 
read by John Horton
2 cassettes
This sequel to Hearing Voices (RC 44123) finds Julian Ramsay at
home one evening reminiscing on his past career and romances. In
his musings, he reveals the secret life of his rival Lampitt
biographer, Raphael Hunter, and the sordid circumstances of
Lampitt's death. Strong language. 1996.
Water from the Well RC 40991
by Myra McLarey 
read by Peggy Gilleland
1 cassette
It is 1919 in Arkansas when the white team of Sugars Spring meets
the black team from nearby Bethel in a cow-pasture baseball game,
the outcome of which upsets prevailing expectations. This and
other dramatic events unfold in these stories of families,
overlapping lives, and racial relations from the 1920s to the
1970s. Descriptions of sex. 1995.
A White Bird Flying RC 43586
by Bess Streeter Aldrich 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Laura Deal's grandmother has died, but Laura still holds on to
the dream they shared "to write lovely things." In this sequel to
A Lantern in Her Hand 
(RC 24820), Laura attends the University of Nebraska, dreaming of
a literary career, but in the end recognizes the stronger claim
of love. 1931.
White Widow RC 44546
by Jim Lehrer 
read by Gary Tipton
2 cassettes
When Trailways driver Jack Oliver is recognized as a master
operator for his career performance, he savors his life's
success. Then he becomes obsessed with a mysterious passenger, a
beautiful "white widow," who drives him to distraction and
eventually to disaster. Strong language. 1996.
The Woman Who Walked into Doors  
RC 45095
by Roddy Doyle 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Paula Spencer has survived a hard life, beset by alcoholism and
spousal abuse. From a child in a happy Irish family, she
developed into an alluring teenager, a young wife and mother,
and, after eighteen years, a widow. At thirty-nine, she is
struggling to reclaim her life. Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. 1996.
¡Yo! RC 44910
by Julia Alvarez 
read by Suzanne Toren
2 cassettes
Yolanda's friends and the Garcia family from How the Garcia Girls
Lost Their Accents (RC 34544) want revenge! Yolanda has written
about their lives and secrets in her popular novel. Now it is
their turn to speak their minds about her. Strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1997.
Zero Coupon RC 40638
by Paul Erdman 
read by Gary Telles
2 cassettes
William F. Saxon has spent three years and a day in prison for
misconduct in the investment business. Now he is free and, with
his $74-million stash in Liechtenstein and some help from former
accomplices, he plans to reestablish himself. He sets up an
operation at a high-tech ranch in the Napa Valley, and everything
is going smoothly until he sells some bogus bonds. Strong
language and some descriptions of sex. 1993.
Gothic
Amethyst Dreams RC 44759
by Phyllis A. Whitney 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Tension abounds in the household of wealthy Nicholas Trench,
whose granddaughter, Susan, vanished two years ago. He has
brought Susan's best friend, Hallie Knight, to Topsail Island,
North Carolina, hoping she can unravel the mystery of Susan's
disappearance. As she searches, Hallie is forced to reexamine her
own life. Bestseller 1997.
The Crying Child RC 44073
by Barbara Michaels 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Mary Fraser's grief after losing yet another child through
miscarriage has brought her to the brink of madness. Mary's
husband begs her sister, Joanne, to join them on the tiny Maine
island of his ancestors and try to help Mary, who claims to hear
a child crying. Joanne truly fears her sister is losing her
mind-until she also hears a cry in the night. 1971.
Greygallows RC 44023
by Barbara Michaels 
read by Vanessa Maroney
2 cassettes
Born in 1826, heiress Lucy Cartwright is soon orphaned and grows
up in an English boarding school. At sixteen she is surprised by
a proposal from mysterious Baron Clare and reluctantly accepts.
He takes Lucy to Greygallows, his estate, but doesn't share her
bedroom and soon begins to mistreat her. Meanwhile, she discovers
the Greygallows ghost. 1972.
Let Us Prey RC 44472
by Dorothy Eden 
read by Vanessa Maroney
2 cassettes
Antonia Webb thought she was going to New Zealand to celebrate
the wedding 
of her cousin Simon Mildmay to Iris Matthews and to gain her
small inheritance from their Aunt Laura. But before she completes
her journey, Antonia begins receiving strange messages, and even
more bizarre things happen when she reaches her destination.
1952.
The Manikin RC 43367
by Joanna Scott 
read by Mary Kane
2 cassettes
Manikin, the lavish estate of a taxidermist, houses a collection
of stuffed creatures. The taxidermist's lonely widow lives on in
this isolated kingdom with a staff of eccentric servants. A new
housekeeper arrives with her young daughter, who is doomed to
grow up in the eerie and cursed house. Strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Master of Blacktower RC 43376
by Barbara Michaels 
read by Vanessa Maroney
2 cassettes (Reissue)
In April of 1853, Damaris Gordon, an independent young woman left
penniless upon the death of her father, arrives in Scotland to
take up her position as companion to the spoiled disabled
daughter of the master of Blacktower-an enigmatic man with a
scarred face who may be responsible for the death of his wife.
1966.
Mistress of Mellyn RC 44443
by Victoria Holt 
read by Corrie James
2 cassettes (Reissue)
For an impoverished gentlewoman like Martha Leigh, twenty-four,
there are few options other than becoming a governess. Martha has
come to Mount Mellyn in Cornwall to care for Connan TreMellyn's
daughter Alvean. Martha soon discovers her pupil's mother was
murdered, and that she is in danger of the same fate. 1960.
Nine Coaches Waiting RC 43401
by Mary Stewart 
read by Anne Flosnik
2 cassettes (Reissue)
In an isolated château in the French Alps, Linda Martin,
governess to the orphaned comte de Valmy, discovers her pupil is
the object of a murder plot involving his crippled uncle and the
latter's son, whom Linda loves. 1958.
The Sea King's Daughter RC 43570
by Barbara Michaels 
read by Sharon Murray
2 cassettes (Reissue)
A romantic suspense novel about a young American girl
unexpectedly employed by her archaeologist father to dive
illegally for Minoan artifacts. As many frightening accidents
happen to her on the Greek island of Thera, she at first suspects
ancient spirits but finally discovers that a live enemy wants her
out of the way. Some strong language. 1975.
Seven Gothic Tales RC 42194
by Isak Dinesen 
read by Laura Giannarelli
3 cassettes
These stories' opulent settings heighten the eeriness of the
supernatural forces and almost madness that run throughout. "The
Deluge at Norderney," about a flood in a resort town that forces
a cardinal, a spinster, and two others to take refuge in a
hayloft, is one of the author's best-known stories and
illustrates her powers of observation and description. The life
of the Danish baroness was the basis for the movie Out of Africa.
1934.
Shelter RC 43397
by Jayne Anne Phillips 
read by Kimberly Schraf
3 cassettes
A rite-of-passage tale in which two young sisters encounter
crazed drifters in a remote West Virginia girls' camp in 1963.
The girls are transformed by their contacts with Parson, a
Bible-obsessed avenger; Buddy, child of the forest; and the
vicious Carmody. Strong language and violence. 1994.
Slow Dancing on Dinosaur Bones  
RC 44882
by Lana Witt 
read by Robert Sams
3 cassettes
Greed and suspicion invade the town of Pick, Kentucky (population
900), when the Conroy Coal Company begins pressing homeowners to
sign over coal-mining rights beneath the quiet streets and
houses. Town residents, including a few downright eccentrics,
oppose the company's efforts, creating a tale of gothic-style
suspense cast in small-town America. 1996.
Violin RC 45005
by Anne Rice 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
In the two days since her husband died, Triana has stayed alone
in the house with his body and the solace of music. A Russian
ghost, Stefan, serenades Triana with his Stradivarius violin, his
music captivating her almost to madness. Their struggle for the
violin also becomes a struggle for her sanity. Bestseller 1997.
The Visiting Physician RC 43396
by Susan Richards Shreve 
read by Michele Schaeffer
2 cassettes
Twenty years ago, Helen Fielding's baby sister drowned while the
children were visiting their aunt in small-town Ohio. Helen
returns to the town as a pediatrician to stem a deadly epidemic.
Less easy to diagnose is the malaise that grips the townspeople
and which Helen must confront to resolve the tragedy of her
youth. 1996.
We Are Eternal RC 41244
by Pierrette Fleutiaux 
read by Laura Giannarelli
5 cassettes
Contemporary gothic novel set in France after World War II.
Estelle Helleur is the sole living member of her family. Burdened
by secrets, she recounts her tragic, incestuous family history to
a mythical "madame." It is a foreboding and passionate tale,
centering around her younger brother Dan, the love of her life
and a dancer like their mother. Estelle begs madame to use her
story to create a dramatic opera. Some strong language. 1990.
Winds of Graystone Manor: The St. Clare Trilogy, Volume 1 RC
44873
by B.J. Hoff 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
Haunted by the death of his wife and their unborn child, Civil
War photographer Roman St. Clare has come to Staten Island in
1867 to search for the killer. He is staying at Graystone Manor,
owned by the charming Amanda Fairchild. Amanda is suspicious of
Roman because of several incidents on the island, but she
eventually joins him in his struggle between good and evil. 1995.
Witch RC 43688
by Barbara Michaels 
read by Margaret Strom
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Hoping to put a failed marriage behind her and begin a new life,
Ellen, with her teenage daughter, moves into an old house in the
Virginia backcountry, only to find it may be haunted by an
eighteenth-century witch. 1973.
Growing Up
The Absence of Angels RC 43444
by W.S. Penn 
read by Jamie Horton
2 cassettes
Alley Hummingbird, born of white and Indian parents, longs to
reconcile the two cultures that have formed him. A rebellious
college student during the Vietnam War, he moves between the Hopi
Second Mesa and Los Angeles in search of identity. When he gets a
brain tumor, he confronts death and finds enlightenment. Strong
language and descriptions of sex. 1994.
The Activist's Daughter RC 45088
by Ellyn Bache 
read by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
1963. For Beryl Rosinsky, going to college has always been about
more than getting an education; she wants to escape her mother's
political activism. Then Beryl's firsthand encounters with
bigotry and hypocrisy at the University of North Carolina cause
her to examine her own values and principles. Some descriptions
of sex. For senior high and older readers. 1997.
A Frozen Woman RC 43113
by Annie Ernaux 
read by Annie Wauters
1 cassette
Autobiographical novel published in France in 1981 about the
author's coming of age in the 1960s. A bright girl with
unconventional parents, she becomes a typical teenager worrying
about looks, first love, and developing the female role. After
marriage she finds herself frozen into a stultifying life. Strong
language and explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
Last Comes the Egg RC 44380
by Bruce Duffy 
read by Steven Carpenter
3 cassettes
After his mother's sudden death, twelve-year-old Frank Dougherty
seeks from friends the intimacy that he lacks with his troubled
father. With two other boys, Frank heads south in a stolen car on
a coming-of-age quest that involves sex and danger. Strong
language. 1997.
Lives of Girls and Women RC 42708
by Alice Munro 
read by Laura Giannarelli
2 cassettes (Reissue)
In this coming-of-age story, bright, impressionable Del Jordan
presents a young girl's view of happenings in the small 1940s
Canadian town where she grows up. She describes the heartaches
and dreams of the townspeople and her own struggle to understand
life. Explicit descriptions of sex. 1971.
Lucky Town RC 44031
by James Brown 
read by Christopher Walker
2 cassettes
A boy's coming-of-age escapade with his shiftless, ex-con father
and a former prostitute. When they reach Las Vegas, where they
scheme to strike it rich, their ventures lead to disaster for the
father and a fresh view on life for the boy. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. 1994.
Northern Borders RC 39940
by Howard Frank Mosher 
read by Ray Dizefalo
2 cassettes
Now an adult, Austen Kittredge III recalls his years on a farm in
northern Vermont. When Austen is six, his widowed father sends
him to live with his grandparents. Austen learns much from this
strangely embattled couple, a grandmother with a passion for
Egyptology and a grandfather who is a surveyor and cartographer.
Near the end of the grandfather's life, he tells Austen a secret
he has shared with only his wife of fifty years. Some strong
language. 1994.
Rumble Fish RC 44103
by S.E. Hinton 
read by John Lescault
1 cassette (Reissue)
Rusty-James, the toughest guy in the junior high crowd, idolizes
his older brother, a mean street fighter. But when Rusty-James
tries to emulate his brother, trouble erupts. For junior and
senior high readers. 1975.
The Saskiad RC 44170
by Brian Hall 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
The coming-of-age tale of Saskia, twelve, who ekes out a living
with her mother on a run-down commune in Ithaca, New York. When
the imaginative Saskia and her friend Jane set out to visit
Saskia's charismatic father, they discover the harsh reality of
adulthood and personal disappointment. Strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1997.
Sydney, Invincible RC 40921
by Colby Rodowsky 
read by June Carter
1 cassette
In this sequel to Sydney, Herself 
(RC 31872), Sydney dreads having her mother as her history
teacher and looks forward to classes with the new writing
instructor. Then Sydney is hit with big news. She is to be the
editor of the school paper-and her mother, who married Sydney's
last writing teacher, is pregnant. Sydney finds support from
boyfriend Wally, but he is dealing with his own problems. For
junior and senior high readers. 1995.
Synonym for Love RC 43368
by Alison Moore 
read by Barbara Pinolini
2 cassettes
Matty Grover is on the move a lot. When her mother dies and her
father leaves her, Matty's previously unknown stepbrother boards
her with the church organist. Later, in the Arizona desert, Matty
deals with family secrets and her own coming-of-age. Strong
language. 1995.
Wish You Were Here RC 39999
by Barbara Shoup 
read by Gregory Ricks
2 cassettes
Jackson was supposed to get an apartment with his best friend,
Brady, for their senior year of high school, but Brady runs away
instead. Now Jax can't benefit from Brady's humorous advice. Jax
must cope with issues like his mother's marriage to Ted; Ted's
two young daughters; Jax's father's latest relationship; and his
own desire for female companionship. Strong language. For high
school and older readers. 1994.
Historical
Against All Odds: The Lucy Scott Mitchum Story RC 45099
by Barbara Riefe 
read by Jill Ferris
2 cassettes
In 1849, Lucy Mitchum is not thrilled with the idea of moving
from Maryland to California by wagon. Her husband, Noah, is so
excited by the prospect of finding gold that she agrees to join
him when the wagon train leaves. But Noah doesn't possess the
skills needed on the trail, and Lucy dreads the day they must
part from the others to make their own way to Sacramento.
Descriptions of sex. 1997.
Angel of the Outback: Land of the Far Horizon, Book 2 RC 43827
by Patricia Hickman 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
In 1793 Rachel Langley finishes her seven-year transportation
sentence in Australia and begins to make a life for herself while
searching for the killer of her best friend, Betsy. When Rachel
finds work with the Prentices on their struggling plantation, her
desire to find Betsy's assassin almost destroys them. Sequel to
Voyage of the Exiles (RC 43445). 1995.
Annapolis RC 44290
by William Martin 
read by Ted Stoddard
5 cassettes
An epic tale spanning eight generations of a maritime family and
two hundred years of American naval history. Portrays the
Stafford family, whose sons served the navy from the early days
of the Barbary Coast and the War of 1812 through the modern-day
Gulf of Tonkin and Persian Gulf engagements. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. 1996.
April Morning RC 43072
by Howard Fast 
read by Gary Tipton
1 cassette (Reissue)
Fictional account of the Revolutionary War battles of Lexington
and Concord, related by fifteen-year-old Adam Cooper. After his
father is shot down by the British, Adam joins the colonial
militia at Lexington in its ambush of British regulars. For
junior and senior high readers. 1961.
Beyond the Wild Shores: Land of the Far Horizon, Book 4 RC 45313
by Patricia Hickman 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Having rejected her suitor, Bailey Templeton of Virginia flees to
Sydney Cove, Australia, to work as a teacher in 1807. Her arrival
is an unpleasant surprise to Captain Grant Hogan, who expects a
male teacher. But Bailey refuses to leave and tries to make a
difference in the lives of the emancipist families and Captain
Hogan. Sequel to The Emerald Flame (RC 43828). 1997.
Birdsong RC 43199
by Sebastian Faulks 
read by George Holmes
4 cassettes
Rootless after an unhappy love affair, young Englishman Stephen
Wraysford joins the World War I British army. He finds
comradeship and loyalty amid the horrors of war as he commands
men charged with digging tunnels under German lines and setting
off bombs there. Violence and explicit descriptions of sex. 1993.
The Book of Daniel RC 41978
by E.L. Doctorow 
read by Ray Hagen
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Paralleling the real-life story of the Rosenberg espionage case,
this novel tells of a young man whose parents are executed during
the cold war for conspiring to steal atomic secrets for Russia.
He portrays the Isaacson family before, during, and after his
parents' arrest, trial, and execution. Some strong language.
1971.
The Boys from St. Petri RC 43112
by Bjarne Reuter 
read by Peter Gil
1 cassette
Lars Balstrup is coming of age in his German-occupied Denmark
village in 1942. He longs to join his older brother's secret
club, the St. Petri Group, which engages in petty acts of
resistance against the Nazis. As the defiance grows more serious,
however, the St. Petri boys find their lives in jeopardy. For
junior and senior high readers. Batchelder Award. 1994.
Braveheart RC 44916
by Randall Wallace 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
As a boy in 1276, William Wallace lost his father and brother at
the hands of the English, who fought the Scots for control of
Scotland. Now a young man, Wallace wages a battle to avenge the
death of his family and crush the tyranny of England. Violence,
strong language, and some descriptions of sex. 1995.
Burr RC 44097
by Gore Vidal 
read by Roy Avers
4 cassettes (Reissue)
A fictional memoir of Aaron Burr, a hero of the American
Revolution, which describes the struggles and endless intrigues
of the new United States. Washington, Jefferson, and Hamilton
emerge as questionable politicians. Bestseller 1973.
By the Green of the Spring: Loss of Eden, Volume 3 RC 43012
by John Masters 
read by John Horton
5 cassettes
In this sequel to Heart of War (RC 42912), it is 1918 and the
guns have fallen silent on the battlefields of Europe. Four
families struggle to mend their lives and pursue their dreams in
the aftermath of the Great War. Some strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1981.
Carnival of Saints RC 44620
by George Herman 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
3 cassettes
In 1502 Renaissance Italy, a mysterious vagabond and an aging
prostitute form a motley troupe of itinerant actors. As their
satirical plays are cheered by the masses, the players find
themselves increasingly imperiled by intrigues of church and
state. Violence and descriptions of sex. 1994.
Chariots in the Smoke: The Appomattox Saga, Book 9 RC 44948
by Gilbert Morris 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
As the Civil War heads toward Vicksburg, David Rocklin arrives in
search of salt and barrels to take back to Richmond. When he
meets Leah Cleburne, a true Confederate, David is forced to make
a tough decision: maintain his stand against slavery or become a
Confederate soldier for the woman he loves. Sequel to Stars in
Their Courses (RC 44573). 1997.
Child of All Nations RC 44104
by Pramoedya Ananta Toer 
read by Ed Blake
3 cassettes
Set in Indonesia in the 1890s. In this sequel to This Earth of
Mankind 
(RC 35356), Minke is distraught over the forced departure of his
wife, Annelies, to the Netherlands, where she later dies. Minke
begins writing but wrestles over which language to use and what
issues to address in asserting the voice of the oppressed
Javanese people. 1990.
Cold Mountain RC 44762
by Charles Frazier 
read by Robert Sams
4 cassettes
A wounded Confederate soldier leaves the war on an arduous trek
to his mountain home and the woman he aims to marry. Meanwhile,
his intended struggles to work her deceased father's hardscrabble
farm. Depicts hardship, peril, and courage in the wartime South.
Strong language and violence. Bestseller 1997.
Cosette: The Sequel to Les Misérables  RC 43461
by Laura Kalpakian 
read by George Holmes
5 cassettes
Cosette, Jean Valjean's adopted daughter, and Marius, a freedom
fighter rescued by Valjean, continue the struggle begun in Victor
Hugo's Les Misérables (RC 35363). They rear their two children
and publish a revolutionary newspaper as a brief, disappointing
French Republic gives way to the Second Empire. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Creek Thunder RC 45114
by Donald Clayton Porter 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
Following the massacre of white settlers at Fort Mims by Creek
Indians, General Andrew Jackson's forces attack the Creek nation
in brutal retaliation. Renno, the White Indian, braves the
perilous conflict in a heroic attempt to rescue his nephew.
Violence and descriptions of sex. 1995.
A Cup of Tea RC 45018
by Amy Ephron 
read by Suzanne Toren
1 cassette
When New York socialite Rosemary Fell invites indigent Eleanor
Smith to her home for tea, the comely young Eleanor becomes
enamored of Rosemary's fiancé, Philip Alsop. Philip weds Rosemary
and goes off to fight in World War I. When he returns, he must
face his betrayed wife and the woman who has borne his child.
Bestseller 1997.
Daybreak: Of Saints and Sinners, Volume 2 RC 43594
by Harold Fickett 
read by Tom Martin
2 cassettes
In 1765, Abram and Sarah have been married for some time, but the
inability to have children has brought discord into their
marriage. Sarah now spends much of her time in Boston, where she
develops an interest in John Singleton Copley, the painter.
Abram, who stays behind in Newburyport, develops an interest of
his own. Sequel to First Light (RC 40431). 1995.
A Dead Man in Deptford RC 42540
by Anthony Burgess 
read by Steven Carpenter
2 cassettes
A fictionalized life of Elizabethan playwright and poet
Christopher Marlowe, depicting his homosexuality, his espionage
for the crown, and his early death in a bar brawl. Using the
diction of the period, Burgess celebrates the life of the great
artist, whom he calls "the Muse's darling." 1993.
Dina's Book RC 43458
by Herbjorg Wassmo 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
In this story set in 1840s Norway, young Dina has felt guilty
since age five for having caused the death of her mother. Now
sixteen, Dina captivates and marries a man her father's age, who
teaches her the joys of sensuality before his untimely death.
Dina is alone and obsessed by her life's tragedies until she once
again discovers love. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
1996.
The Discoveries of Mrs. Christopher Columbus: His Wife's Version 
RC 40682
by Paula DiPerna 
read by Laura Giannarelli
3 cassettes
DiPerna imagines what would have happened if Columbus's wife had
accompanied him on his voyage to the New World. Frustrated in her
desire to be more of a partner in his life, Felipa keeps a diary.
While recording political struggles in Spain, rigors of the
voyage, and wonders of discovery, she explores her own emotions
as well. Some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.
The Double Tongue RC 40937
by William Golding 
read by June Carter
1 cassette
In ancient Greece, the oracle at Delphi is in decline until the
priest finds a young girl with powers, Arieka, to train as a
Pythia, the earthly voice of the shrine. But the shrine, the
priest, and Greece all continue to decline, and Arieka, now in
her eighties, recalls long, lonely years without hope. Second
draft by Nobel prize-winning author, who died before completing
the final. Some strong language and some descriptions of sex.
1995.
Dust and Ashes: The Arbat Trilogy, Volume 3 RC 43598
by Anatoli Rybakov 
read by Ken Kliban
4 cassettes
In this sequel to Fear (RC 37477), Sasha Pankratov emerges from
exile in 1937 to join the Russian army tank corps, which is
preparing to oppose the Nazi juggernaut. Sasha fights valiantly
in battle, achieves personal redemption, and is reunited with his
true love, Varya. Some violence. 1996.
1812 RC 43939
by David Nevin 
read by Bob Askey
4 cassettes
This sequel to Dream West (RC 20213) follows the lives of
national figures James and Dolley Madison, Andrew Jackson, and
Winfield Scott. As the new republic is drawn into conflict with
England, regional divisions at first beset America's war effort.
The tide turns, and in 1815 Jackson wins the Battle of New
Orleans. Strong language and violence. 1996.
The Emerald Flame: Land of the Far Horizon, Book 3 RC 43828
by Patricia Hickman 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
In 1800 twelve-year-old Kelsey McBride is torn from her beloved
Ireland and sent to Australia with her mother, a convicted
dissident. Kelsey wants to return to Ireland, but the love of the
Prentice family changes her mind. And Rachel Langley finally
returns to Sydney Cove, where surprises await her. Sequel to
Angel of the Outback (RC 43827). 1996.
Every Man for Himself RC 43731
by Beryl Bainbridge 
read by Rick Rohan
1 cassette
Aboard the RMS Titanic on its maiden voyage in 1912 is a wealthy
young man who helped design the ship that now bears him home to
New York. En route he is daunted by an unrequited love affair and
by the squalid life of the ship's crew amid the opulence above
deck. When disaster strikes, he faces tests of courage and
survival. 1996.
Everyone's Gone to the Moon 
RC 43609
by Philip Norman 
read by Steven Crossley
4 cassettes
Louis Brennan writes for a hip magazine in "Mod London" at the
height of the "swinging sixties." He and his married editor, Jack
Shildrick, are both having an affair with the same secretary.
Brennan is torn between his loyalty to the older, stodgier
Shildrick and his desire to gain acceptance from his younger,
talented colleagues. Some strong language. 1995.
Familiar Acts RC 43910
by June Barraclough 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
As a child growing up in Victorian England, Hetty Coppen always
sensed that her mother favored Hetty's younger sister. When Hetty
discovers that she is a stepchild, she vows to uncover her
family's past. On a trip in Italy, Hetty encounters intrigue and
romance as she assembles her family history. 1993.
The Fields of Glory: The Wakefield Dynasty, Volume 4 RC 44280
by Gilbert Morris 
read by Lynn Schrichte
2 cassettes
Evan Morgan just can't stay out of trouble, and now he has been
thrown out of Wales. He is going to live with the Wakefields, who
are hoping he will be a companion for their son Amos. Along the
way, Evan rescues Jenny Clairmont, a runaway, and together the
three young people form a triangle that tests the limits of their
faith. Sequel to The Shield of Honor (RC 41526). 1996.
The Fifth Column and Four Stories of the Spanish Civil War RC
40905
by Ernest Hemingway 
read by Graci Ragsdale
1 cassette (Reissue)
Contains the author's only full-length play, which conveys the
feverish life in Madrid under siege. The accompanying stories
grew from Hemingway's experience as a foreign correspondent. Some
strong language and some violence. 1938.
Flashman and the Angel of the Lord: From "The Flashman Papers,"
1858-1859  RC 42979
edited by George MacDonald Fraser 
read by Graeme Malcolm
3 cassettes
The cowardly and lecherous Harry Flashman is recruited to the
cause of abolitionist John Brown in 1859. Flashman's adventures
see him enlisted as a government spy, abducted by white
supremacists, and involved in John Brown's raid on the federal
arsenal at Harper's Ferry. Some descriptions of sex. 1994.
Footsteps RC 43597
by Pramoedya Ananta Toer 
read by Graeme Malcolm
3 cassettes
This sequel to Child of All Nations 
(RC 44104) is set in the early-twentieth-century Dutch East
Indies, later Indonesia. Minke leaves his medical studies to
become a crusading journalist and political activist in the
struggle against Dutch rule. 1990.
The Forge RC 43658
by T.S. Stribling 
read by Ilona Dulaski
3 cassettes
In this prequel to The Store (RC 43211), an Alabama family,
headed by slaveowner and cotton farmer Jimmie Vaiden, finds their
southern way of life profoundly affected by the Civil War and its
aftermath. Strong language. 1931.
Hearts of Hickory: A Story of Andrew Jackson and the War of 1812
RC 44089
by John Trotwood Moore 
read by Jack Fox
3 cassettes
The return of heroes Andrew Jackson and David Crockett after the
Creek War inspires Philippe to leave his childhood home near the
Hermitage to become a grown-up man. As the War of 1812 brews,
Philippe is smitten by Pamela Crockett, niece of the famous
scout, but Philippe's exploits lead him away, among the Creek
Indians. Historical adventure by a former Tennessee state
librarian. 1926.
His Father's House RC 41115
by D.J. Meador 
read by Michael Kramer
3 cassettes
When his father dies in 1973, Robert Trepnitz Kirkman finds among
his father's papers a letter, a photograph, and an account of an
event that took place during World War I. Kirkman's compulsion to
find the woman to whom the letter was addressed takes him on an
odyssey through East and West Germany and into the lives of a
German family. He compares the divided Germany to the American
South after the Civil War. 1994.
Hiwassee: A Novel of the Civil War  
RC 44371
by Charles F. Price 
read by Terence Aselford
1 cassette
A North Carolina mountain family struggles against marauding
bands of Yankee partisans who run amok in the Civil War South.
While the parents and daughters defend their homestead and harbor
a 
battle-wounded son, his brothers are 
away fighting to preserve the waning Confederacy. Strong language
and violence. 1996.
Homecoming: The Holts; an American Dynasty, Volume 9 RC 42633
by Dana Fuller Ross 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Pacific Destiny 
(RC 38606), Henry Blake is discouraged by the protracted war in
Manila, but falls in love with a local woman. Frank returns from
the Yukon, only to be drawn back to the West. Aspiring artist
India Blackstone must fight to pursue her dreams. Strong
language, some violence, and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
The Horses at the Gate: Earthsong Trilogy, Volume 2 RC 42880
by Mary Mackey 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
In this sequel to The Year the Horses Came (RC 42879), Marrah and
converted Hansi warrior Stavan struggle on to Shara, a
prehistoric city in the Ukrainian steppes. Their plight continues
as the Hansi seek out the renegade Stavan. Violence and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1995.
I Was Amelia Earhart RC 44456
by Jane Mendelsohn 
read by Kimberly Schraf
1 cassette
Fictionalized account of the aviatrix's last days on a small
Pacific Island, assuming that she and navigator Fred Noonan
survived the crash that ended their attempt to circumnavigate the
globe in 1937. Reminiscences of childhood, marriage, and planning
for the historic flight are interspersed with day-to-day survival
efforts and occasional moments of joy in Noonan's company. 1996.
The Iron Lady: The House of Winslow, Book 19 RC 43775
by Gilbert Morris 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
3 cassettes
In 1902 three Winslow cousins arrive in New York City to seek
their future. Ruth becomes a missionary at Baxter Hospital with
Dr. David Burns. Priscilla also works at the hospital but finds
herself drawn to Broadway. And Esther, who wants to do something
important, photographs the plight of immigrants. Sequel to The
Rough Rider (RC 43774). 1996.
Jackson RC 44557
by Max Byrd 
read by Jack Fox
3 cassettes
A fictional portrayal of the political life and times of Andrew
Jackson. In 1828 President Jackson's political adversaries
commission David Chase to write a biography aimed at damaging
Jackson's reelection prospects. Chase experiences a crisis of
conscience as sensitive facts emerge. Strong language. 1997.
The Knight and the Dove RC 43100
by Lori Wick 
read by Jill Ferris
2 cassettes
King Henry VIII has ordered a marriage between Bracken of
Hawkings Crest and a daughter of Lord Vincent of Stone Lake. When
Marigold refuses, Vincent offers his youngest, Megan. She and
Bracken get off to a shaky start, but matters worsen when
Marigold learns Bracken is to become a duke. Sequel to Who Brings
Forth the Wind (RC 43099). 1995.
Knights RC 44937
by Linda Lael Miller 
read by Ann Hodapp
2 cassettes
At the age of five, Megan Saunders walked through an opening in a
wall and found herself in the thirteenth century, where she is
called Gloriana and betrothed to Dane St. Gregory. Now 
several years later, Gloriana's husband returns from years at
war, and she hopes to finally become his true wife. But he has
brought home another woman. Some explicit descriptions of sex.
1996.
The Knowledge of Water RC 43212
by Sarah Smith 
read by Mary Kane
3 cassettes
This sequel to The Vanished Child 
(RC 36805) is set in Paris in 1910, when the Seine overflows.
Concert pianist Perdita Halley regrets her career-based refusal
to marry scientist Alexander von Reisden. As their love deepens,
the two become entangled in a web of art theft and forgery,
conspiracy, and murder. Violence and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Legacies RC 43513
by Janet Dailey 
read by Mary Kane
3 cassettes
It has been five years since Diane Parmelee saw Lije Stuart, yet
the attraction to each other is still very evident. But in this
sequel to The Proud and the Free (RC 40764), Lije, now a Harvard
graduate, is forced to return to his Cherokee Nation home without
Diane, as the country heads toward civil war. Some violence and
some descriptions of sex. 1995.
London RC 44752
by Edward Rutherfurd 
read by Graeme Malcolm
7 cassettes
A tale spanning two millennia of London history, as revealed in
the lives and fortunes of generations of six imaginary families.
Traces the city's evolution from a small trading port to a
flourishing metropolis. Touches on the natural, social, and
political aspects of England's capital. Violence. Bestseller
1997.
The Long Way Home: The Real People, Book 5 RC 43449
by Robert J. Conley 
read by Erik Sandvold
1 cassette
In this sequel to The Way South 
(RC 40256), an enslaved Cherokee priest, Deadwood Lighter,
becomes an interpreter for conquistador Hernando de Soto. On de
Soto's expedition and quest for gold in Florida, the priest is
appalled at the Spaniards' cruelty. As de Soto nears Cherokee
territory, Lighter escapes to warn his people. Violence. 1994.
Look Away RC 44411
by Harold Coyle 
read by Roy Avers
4 cassettes
Following the accidental death of a young woman for whom they
both had an affection, James and Kevin Bannon are sent off to
school. Because of the growing conflict between the North and
South, their father sends one to Virginia while the other stays
in New Jersey. And as civil war breaks out, they find themselves
facing one another in battle. Prequel to Until the End (RC
44412). Some strong language. 1995.
The Middle Heart RC 43912
by Bette Bao Lord 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
During the turbulent 1930s in China, three outcasts form a bond
that lasts a lifetime. Steel Hope, an undesired second son of a
fallen family, is assigned a tutor, Mountain Pine, whose leg is
malformed. They join with Firecrackers, an orphaned girl, in
decades of struggle to survive under the Communist regime. Some
strong language, some violence, and some descriptions of sex.
1996.
Milton in America RC 44815
by Peter Ackroyd 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
"What if the outspoken seventeenth-century English poet John
Milton had fled England in 1660 to avoid arrest and emigrated to
Puritan America?" supposes Ackroyd. In his scenario, the aging
and blind agitator establishes a settlement named New Milton,
where he rules with an iron hand and wages war on a neighboring
colony of Roman Catholics. 1996.
Mister Christian RC 41112
by William Kinsolving 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
In this take on the HMS Bounty, mutineer Fletcher Christian is
captured by pirates, then escapes and rescues a woman with whom
he finds love on a deserted island. Christian makes his way back
to England where he changes his identity, returns to sea, and
eventually reencounters the vengeful Bligh. Violence and
descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Oracle Glass RC 43379
by Judith Merkle Riley 
read by Annie Wauters
4 cassettes
At fifteen Geneviève Pasquier is orphaned and living in Paris
during the reign of Louis XIV. She is taken in and tutored by La
Voisin, an occultist and witch. Gifted with the power to read the
swirling waters of the oracle glass, Geneviève finds intrigue and
danger at the king's court. 1994.
Out of the Shelter RC 43687
by David Lodge 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
A coming-of-age story based on the author's teen years during and
after World War II. Having survived bombing and privation in
wartime Britain, he stays with his older sister in
American-occupied Germany, where he experiences a world of
abundance and glamor that changes him forever. Strong language
and descriptions of sex. 1985.
People of the Lakes: The First North Americans, Volume 6 RC 41693
by Kathleen O'Neal Gear and 
W. Michael Gear 
read by Jim Zeiger
6 cassettes
The Mask, an evil spirit among the Hopewell Mound Builders, now
has complete control of Mica Bird. For peace to be restored, his
wife, Star Shell, must take the Mask to the Great Lakes and throw
it into the Roaring Waters. For Star Shell it is a race against
time. Sequel to People of the Sea (RC 41692). Violence, strong
language, and some descriptions of sex. For senior high and older
readers. 1994.
People of the Lightning: The First North Americans, Volume 7 RC
43174
by Kathleen O'Neal Gear and 
W. Michael Gear 
read by Jim Zeiger
4 cassettes
In this sequel to The People of the Lakes (RC 41693), the authors
discuss the Windover people who lived in what is now Florida some
eight thousand years ago. The story centers around Pondwader, an
albino, who becomes known as White Lightning Boy. Violence and
some descriptions of sex. For high school and older readers.
1995.
People of the Silence: The First North Americans, Volume 8 RC
44626
by Kathleen O'Neal Gear and 
W. Michael Gear 
read by Jim Zeiger
5 cassettes
This sequel to People of the Lightning (RC 43174) focuses on the
Anasazi people of what is now northwestern New Mexico. In the
mid-twelfth century, teenaged Cornsilk and Poor Singer seek their
beginnings amid the fall of an empire beset by internal warfare.
Violence and some descriptions of sex. For senior high and older
readers. 1996.
The Persian Boy RC 44166
by Mary Renault 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
4 cassettes (Reissue)
A beautiful slave boy is given as a peace offering by the Persian
king to Alexander the Great, and their meeting develops into a
love that lasts until Alexander's death. Descriptions of sex and
some violence. 1972.
The Physician of London: The Second Part of the
Seventeenth-Century Trilogy of Nicholas Cooke RC 43460
by Stephanie Cowell 
read by John Horton
3 cassettes
This sequel to Nicholas Cooke (RC 37467) opens in 1617 as
Nicholas, now a physician and priest, is living in a small London
parish. Nicholas and his colleagues form a scientific society to
better the world. His friend, the politically ambitious Thomas
Wentworth, becomes the focus of controversy and faces execution
for treason. 1995.
The Pioneers: An American Family Portrait, Book 5 RC 43858
by Jack Cavanaugh 
read by John Stratton
2 cassettes
Jesse Morgan, twenty, lives in the lower east side tenements of
1890s New York. He dreams of a better life, knowing God will help
him. But Morgan encounters tragedy when he thinks he let someone
die. He flees to the West, followed by several people-including
Emily, who wants to be his wife. Sequel to The Adversaries (RC
41795). 1996.
Pope Joan RC 43715
by Donna Woolfolk Cross 
read by Nanette Savard
4 cassettes
Born in ninth-century Europe, Joan aspires to an education, a
privilege then denied to girls. When her brother is killed in a
Viking raid, she assumes his identity as a male, enters a
monastery, and rises through the ranks of the church to the
Throne of Saint Peter itself. 1996.
Radetzky March RC 43848
by Joseph Roth 
read by Robert Blumenfeld
3 cassettes
In mid-nineteenth-century Austria, Lieutenant Trotta saves the
life of Emperor Franz Joseph in battle. For his deed, Trotta is
knighted a baron. The Trotta family live in the shadow of their
heroic forebear through the waning years of the Hapsburg Empire
in the changing world prior to World War I. First published in
German in 1932. 1995.
Ragtime RC 44378
by E.L. Doctorow 
read by Jeff Baker
2 cassettes (Reissue)
A story set in 1906 New York that incorporates luminaries of the
period, including Theodore Roosevelt, Sigmund Freud, and Emma
Goldman. A ragtime musician from Harlem falls victim to racist
vandalism and seeks redress through violence. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. 1974.
Raising Holy Hell RC 42964
by Bruce Olds 
read by Gary Telles
2 cassettes
A fictionalized account of the life of abolitionist John Brown
from his Ohio roots to his failed raid on the federal arsenal at
Harper's Ferry and subsequent hanging in 1859. Using private
letters, interviews, speeches, public documents, and other
sources, the author weaves his story of Brown's violent
commitment to the antislavery cause. Includes views of historic
figures such as Frederick Douglass and Robert E. Lee. 1995.
The Ramparts of Heaven: The Wakefield Dynasty, Volume 5 RC 44700
by Gilbert Morris 
read by Lynn Schrichte
2 cassettes
The mines are closing in Wales, so Gareth, sixteen, and his
sister Dorcas, eighteen, are grateful to accept their relatives'
invitation to live in England. Cousin Andrew, studying for the
priesthood, comes to accompany them. Soon the three young people
are caught up in the spiritual revival that is sweeping the land.
Sequel to The Fields of Glory 
(RC 44280). 1997.
The Ramsay Scallop RC 39908
by Frances Temple 
read by Randy Means
2 cassettes
1299. Fourteen-year-old Elenor waits, reluctantly, for her
betrothed, Lord Thomas, to return from his crusade to the Holy
Land. Though it is their duty to marry, neither relishes the
prospect. Elenor is frightened of marriage; Thomas has been
broken by the crusade. Father Gregory sends them on a chaste
pilgrimage to Spain. Through their long wandering, Elenor and
Thomas come to know themselves and each other. For junior and
senior high readers. 1994.
The Rifles: Seven Dreams; a Book of North American Landscapes,
Volume 6  RC 42993
by William T. Vollmann 
read by Ed Blake
3 cassettes
Follows The Ice-Shirt (RC 32983) and Second Dream, Fathers and
Crows 
(RC 37080), which covered North America's history up to the
sixteenth century. Here the author intertwines Sir John
Franklin's 1840s search for a Northwest passage with the
relocation of the Inuits in the 1950s and its results. Some
violence. 1994.
Roanoke: The Lost Colony; Keepers of the Ring, Volume 1 RC 44069
by Angela Elwell Hunt 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
3 cassettes
Using John White's 1587 voyage to America, Hunt creates a
fictional account of the founding of Roanoke colony. Jocelyn
White is reluctant to join her uncle's expedition, but he and
Jocelyn's father insist she accompany her cousin, Eleanor,
recently married and pregnant. John also makes sure a future
husband for Jocelyn is aboard. 1996.
The Rough Rider: The House of Winslow, Book 18 RC 43774
by Gilbert Morris 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
Teddy Roosevelt is forming his Rough Riders, and Lewis Winslow
joins up. His older brother Aaron enlists to keep an eye on Lewis
and to act as a war correspondent for William Randolph Hearst.
Also enlisting are Dr. David Burns and Gail Summers, his
assistant. As war rages, Gail's affections shift from David to
Aaron. Sequel to The Yukon Queen 
(RC 42190). 1995.
The Secret Diary of Anne Boleyn  
RC 44455
by Robin Maxwell 
read by Vanessa Maroney
3 cassettes
Fictionalized account of sixteenth-century royal life in England
told through the eyes of the young queen, Elizabeth I, and a
diary kept in secret by her mother, Anne Boleyn. Events in
Elizabeth's life unfold alongside those retold in the diary, and
her mother's words bring her new insight into her family and
herself. 1997.
The Secret of Sarah Revere RC 40983
by Ann Rinaldi 
read by Graci Ragsdale
1 cassette
Many things happen at once in the life of Sarah, Paul Revere's
thirteen-year-old daughter. Her father keeps secrets about his
revolutionary activities, but Sarah learns of them through
gossip. She is also troubled by Dr. Warren's attention to her
stepmother and finds herself feeling jealous. For junior and
senior high readers. 1995.
Secret Place of Thunder: Cheney Duvall M.D., Volume 5 RC 44907
by Lynn and Gilbert Morris 
read by Suzanne Toren
3 cassettes
Cheney Duvall and her nurse, Shiloh Irons, have finally reached
New Orleans. But even as they are poling up the bayou to Cheney's
aunts' plantation, both realize strange things are going on along
the shore. They soon discover a priestess has put a curse on the
plantation and its indigo crop. Sequel to Toward the Sunrising
(RC 44908). 1996.
The Shadow of His Wings: The Appomattox Saga, Book 6 RC 41584
by Gilbert Morris 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
Rooney Smith is a young woman in trouble who has fled to Richmond
to begin a new life. She meets Lowell Rocklin after he is wounded
and taken to a Richmond hospital. While recovering, Lowell tells
Rooney of his plans to make an observation hot-air balloon to
help the Confederate Army. They build the balloon, but then fate
steps in and deals them a severe blow. Sequel to Out of the
Whirlwind 
(RC 41583). 1994.
Silent Honor RC 43683
by Danielle Steel 
read by Mary Kane
2 cassettes
Hiroko's father is a man ahead of his time, while her mother is
steeped in Japanese traditions. At eighteen, Hiroko bows to her
father's wishes and travels to California to stay with cousins
and attend college. It is 1941, and Hiroko soon finds herself an
enemy in a foreign land. Some strong language and some
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
The Silver Star: The House of Winslow, Book 20 RC 45106
by Gilbert Morris 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
3 cassettes
Determined to put Eddie Rich behind her, Priscilla Winslow leaves
Broadway and heads to California for a movie career. Her cousin
Andrew and his family have also come to California, where he is
to be the new pastor of Faith Temple. Both find themselves
confronting difficult choices. Sequel to The Iron Lady (RC
43775). 1997.
Snow Wolf RC 43906
by Glenn Meade 
read by Chuck Benson
4 cassettes
In 1953 President Eisenhower receives alarming reports of Joseph
Stalin's deteriorating mental health and of a heightened risk of
war. Ike authorizes the CIA to kill Stalin, and two agents are
dropped in Moscow. When the plot goes awry, the agents come under
threat from both sides and find an unlikely ally. Violence,
strong language, and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Song in a Strange Land: The Liberty Bell, Book 2 RC 44480
by Gilbert Morris 
read by Jack Fox
3 cassettes
Boston, 1775. Dake Bradford is an American patriot. His cousin
Clive Gordon is a Tory. As war breaks out, the two find
themselves on opposite sides. And both are in love with Jeanne
Corbeau, a young girl who once saved Clive's life. Sequel to
Sound the Trumpet (RC 42297). 1996.
Spite Fences RC 41946
by Trudy Krisher 
read by Laura Giannarelli
2 cassettes
Maggie Pugh, thirteen, lives in Kinship, Georgia, where in 1960
there are racially segregated parks, lunch counters, and
bathrooms. Maggie is good friends with Zeke, a black man who
peddles goods in Kinship. When Zeke is brutally beaten, life
changes dramatically for Maggie, who is no stranger to abuse. She
uses the camera given her by Zeke to record the truth. Violence.
For junior and senior high readers. 1994.
Stars in Their Courses: The Appomattox Saga, Book 8 RC 44573
by Gilbert Morris 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
In the summer of 1863, Frank Rocklin, who would rather act than
fight, joins a theater group in Washington, D.C., as a spy.
Before long, his abilities are recognized by Allan Pinkerton, who
sends Rocklin on a secret mission as part of an acting troupe
touring the South. But perhaps the greatest danger he faces may
come from an actress. Sequel to Wall of Fire (RC 41585). 1995.
The Store RC 43211
by T.S. Stribling 
read by Ilona Dulaski
4 cassettes
Chronicle of an Alabama family headed by Colonel Miltiades
Vaiden, a southern gentleman who fought at Shiloh and was a Klan
member during Reconstruction. The story depicts the ending of the
old South and the beginning of the new. Sequel to The Forge (RC
43658). Strong language. 1933 Pulitzer Prize winner. 1932.
The Sun in Splendour: The Plantagenet Saga, Volume 14 RC 44731
by Jean Plaidy 
read by Patricia Kilgarriff
3 cassettes
This sequel to Red Rose of Anjou 
(RC 40059) begins with Edward of York successfully wresting the
throne from the Lancasters and continues with his marriage to
Elizabeth Woodville, who presents him with ten children. But his
reign is continually plagued by the conflict between the houses
of York and Lancaster. 1982.
Talons of Eagles RC 44013
by William W. Johnstone 
read by Jack Fox
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Dreams of Eagles 
(RC 44012), Jamie MacCallister joins the Confederate cause in the
Civil War as leader of MacCallister's Marauders. When the tide of
the war turns in favor of the North and some Union troops resort
to rape and pillage, the Marauders become a swift agent of
revenge. Strong language and violence. 1995.
Tapes of the River Delta RC 44108
by Peter Cunningham 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
Theo Shortcourse escapes from the mental hospital where he is
held after committing murder. He hides out in the river delta,
where he long ago swam with boyhood friends, one of whom is now
Ireland's prime minister. Theo reveals the chilling story of his
tragic life by talking into a tape recorder. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Theory of War RC 41117
by Joan Brady 
read by Kimberly Schraf
2 cassettes
Brady draws on her grandfather's experience to tell of a white
boy sold into slavery after the Civil War. Four-year-old Jonathan
Carrick begins a life few animals could endure. But he makes his
way with the help of the railroad, a friend, a preacher, and some
education. Later, years of adversity tell on Carrick and produce
serious consequences within his family. Winner of Britain's
Whitbread Award. Strong language and some violence. 1993.
A Time for Silence RC 44928
by Philippa Carr 
read by Barbara Caruso
2 cassettes
Britishers Lucinda and Annabelinda, who have been friends since
childhood, are delighted when they both have the chance to attend
an exclusive finishing school in Belgium. But an indiscretion on
the part of Annabelinda and the beginning of World War I send
both girls fleeing back to England and an uncertain future. 1991.
Tracks of Deceit: Katy Steele Adventures, Volume 1 RC 43159
by Alan and Gilbert Morris 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
When a Central Pacific Railroad detective is murdered in 1867,
his daughter, Katy, is hired to investigate. Katy and her fellow
sleuth, Sam Bronte, uncover a web of official corruption as they
track the murderer and railroad saboteur. 1996.
Two Crowns for America RC 43911
by Katherine Kurtz 
read by Jill Ferris
3 cassettes
In 1775 George Washington falls from his horse and, while
unconscious, has a vision of a Masonic ceremony involving a
woman. The author of Washington's vision is the ageless Masonic
master, whose aim is to seat Bonnie Prince Charlie on the throne
of America. Washington's vision comes to pass, while the master's
is foiled. 1996.
Underworld RC 45021
by Don DeLillo 
read by John Stratton
5 cassettes
This narrative starts at the end of the cold war in the early
1990s and works back to 1951 when baseball and the atomic bomb
dominated headlines in American newspapers. The private lives of
Nick Shay, a waste disposal manager, and Klara Sax, an
ecology-minded artist, intermingle with public events and
historic characters. Some descriptions of sex, some violence, and
some strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Unfinished Cathedral RC 44433
by T.S. Stribling 
read by Ilona Dulaski
3 cassettes
Sequel to The Store (RC 43211). Amidst a backdrop of rising
prosperity for the emerging middle class of the 1920s, Jerry
Catlin, a Methodist minister and nephew of Colonel Miltiades
Vaiden, struggles to create a cathedral in the town of Florence,
Alabama. Strong language. 1934.
Variations on Night and Day RC 43634
by 'Abd al-Rahman Munif 
read by Robert Blumenfeld
3 cassettes
In the final novel of the Cities of Salt trilogy, Sultan
Khureybit rises to power in the Persian Gulf nation-state of
Mooran in the 1930s. During his reign, Khureybit- who is aided by
the underhanded British -battles rival clans and squelches
internal opposition using bribery and brutality. Sequel to The
Trench (RC 35743). 1989.
Voyage of the Exiles: Land of the Far Horizon, Book 1 RC 43445
by Patricia Hickman 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
England, 1787. George Prentice's death sentence is reduced to
exile in Australia. Prentice is unaware that his wife and
daughter are also headed to the new colony under separate
passage. After a perilous voyage, they are reunited in their new
land. Prequel to Angel of the Outback (RC 43827). 1995.
The Waiting Time RC 44609
by Eugenia Price 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
Coastal Georgia, late 1850s. When Abigail Banes of Boston marries
plantation-owner Eli Allyn, she doesn't mind Eli's owning slaves
because she knows he will treat them well. But then Eli drowns,
and Abby is left to run the plantation. As Abby and her overseer,
Thaddeus Green, become abolitionists, Thad becomes Abby's
helpmate. Bestseller 1997.
Wall of Fire: The Appomattox Saga, Book 7 RC 41585
by Gilbert Morris 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
Mark Rocklin is dying, and there is something he must do before
he goes. Years ago he fell in love with a woman named Beth but
did not marry her, and now he has learned they share a daughter.
Allyn is located and brought to Gracefield, but it will take some
time for her and Mark to become close, and even longer for her to
accept his plans for her future. Sequel to The Shadow of His
Wings (RC 41584). 1995.
The Wandering Arm RC 43642
by Sharan Newman 
read by Robert Blumenfeld
2 cassettes
Medieval France. When the theft of a reliquary is linked to some
of their friends and family, a former nun and her husband launch
a discreet search. Upon the murder of one suspect, a Jewish
merchant, the case becomes even more complex and their
investigation increasingly perilous. 1995.
Warrior Scarlet RC 43867
by Rosemary Sutcliff 
read by Tom Martin
2 cassettes (Reissue)
A tale set in England during the Bronze Age. A boy aspires to
wear the warrior's scarlet, the sign of manhood in his tribe. To
do so, he must first slay a wolf. But with a withered spear arm,
he faces a formidable challenge. For junior and senior high
readers. Violence. 1958.
Waverley; or, 'Tis Sixty Years Since  
RC 44321
by Sir Walter Scott 
read by George Holmes
5 cassettes
This historical novel, the first in English and the first fiction
work by this author, tells of Edward Waverley, a romantic captain
in the royal army, who resigns his commission and proposes
marriage to an ardent supporter of the Stuart cause. Rejected, he
enters the service of Prince Charles Edward and becomes a rebel.
1814.
The Wedding Dress: Stories from the Dakota Plains RC 43856
by Carrie Young 
read by Catherine Byers
1 cassette
In the title story, Ildri, a seamstress of Norwegian descent, is
asked to model an intricately made wedding dress. Upon leaving
her position, Ildri buys the dress and lends it to a succession
of brides in her homesteading community before finding her own
bittersweet use for it. The collection's other entries are also
peopled with Norwegian Americans on the Dakota plains. Some
strong language. 1992.
Wooden Fish Songs RC 43902
by Ruthanne Lum McCunn 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
Three women recount stories about the life of Chinese immigrant
and botanist Lue Gim Gong, whose 1870s experiments in
hybridization boosted the Florida citrus industry. Recounts his
life of privation prior to emigrating, his education in America,
and the alienation that he felt in spite of his professional
success. 1995.
Human Relationships
The Animals' Waltz RC 43899
by Cary Fagan 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Quirky Sheila Hersh leads a double life. By day she writes ads
for her father's Toronto mattress store. By night she is part of
the art scene, where she stars in an underground film. Intrigued
with an Austrian book of poems, Sheila goes to romantic Vienna
where she makes some surprising discoveries. Strong language and
some descriptions of sex. 1994.
Bombardiers RC 43265
by Po Bronson 
read by Ray Foushee
3 cassettes
Sid Geeder is a top-selling bond trader but he hates his work and
only hangs on to become vested in his firm's stock. As Sid and
the other greedy rogues hustle bonds to gullible people, their
deals become more bizarre, culminating in the corporate takeover
of a country. Strong language and some explicit descriptions of
sex. 1995.
Bone Truth RC 43388
by Anne Finger 
read by Kimberly Schraf
2 cassettes
Elizabeth, single and unexpectedly pregnant, considers her own
childhood and how her disability and her abusive father have
shaped her. She finds peace with herself through her art and her
humor, but worries about the effects she and the baby will have
on one another. Strong language, violence, and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1994.
Brain Fever RC 42974
by Valerie Sayers 
read by David Palmer
2 cassettes
Middle-aged professor Tim Rooney feels another breakdown looming
when he leaves his fiancée, decides to find his former wife, and
heads for New York with fifteen thousand dollars stuffed in his
shoes. Tim's mind slowly unravels as he contends with past and
present troubles. Strong language and some explicit descriptions
of sex. 1996.
The Bubble Reputation RC 43387
by Cathie Pelletier 
read by Faith Potts
2 cassettes
Grieving Rosemary O'Neal is just emerging from isolation after
the suicide of her lover when her oddball family and friends move
in and complicate her recovery. Rosemary retreats into a backyard
tent for privacy until a troubling turn of events brings her back
into the family circle. Strong language. 1993.
A Child's Night Dream RC 44860
by Oliver Stone 
read by Steven Carpenter
2 cassettes
In this autobiographical story, an alienated young man leaves
home on a harrowing odyssey to Vietnam as a combat soldier,
across the ocean as a merchant seaman, and to a hotel room in
Mexico where he writes about his experiences. Explores the power
that dreams have to direct one's life. Strong language, violence,
and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Come in from the Cold RC 43049
by Marsha Qualey 
read by Gary Tipton
1 cassette
In 1969, Maud is seventeen and her older antiwar activist sister
has just been killed in a bomb blast. Meanwhile in another
Minnesota town, seventeen-year-old Jeff steps up his own protests
against the Vietnam War after his brother is killed in battle.
The two meet and find solace in each other. Some descriptions of
sex. For junior and senior high readers. 1994.
Comfort Woman RC 44684
by Nora Okja Keller 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
A Korean-American girl grows up in Hawaii with her mother, who is
secretly haunted by memories of sexual enslavement as a "comfort
woman" during the Japanese occupation of Korea. Outwardly she
exhibits her trauma through embarrassing bouts with the spirit
world. The daughter, who loves and protects her, learns the
horrible truth only after her mother's death. Violence and
descriptions of sex. 1997.
Couplings RC 43732
by Peter Schneider 
read by Steven Carpenter
2 cassettes
Eduard, a biologist in West Berlin, determines the longevity of
human love affairs to be three and one-half years. He wagers with
two friends that the three of them will not be with their current
partners one year hence. Over the course of the year, each of the
three men's relationships falls victim to fate. Strong language.
1996.
A Crack in Forever RC 45052
by Jeannie Brewer 
read by Barbara Pinolini
2 cassettes
When illustrator Alexandra Taylor meets sexy medical student Eric
Moro, she drops her steady boyfriend and begins a whirlwind
relationship with Eric. After she happily accepts his marriage
proposal, they learn Eric is HIV-positive. Explicit descriptions
of sex and some strong language. 1996.
Dreams of My Russian Summers  
RC 45019
by Andreï Makine 
read by Ken Kliban
2 cassettes
A Soviet youth imbibes his French grandmother's tales of Paris
and the Soviet Revolution during his summer visits to her home on
the steppes. His fascination with her and her stories transcends
his Russian life and leads him eventually to France. Some
violence. Winner of top French literary awards: the Prix Goncourt
and the Prix Médicis. Bestseller 1995.
Driver's Ed RC 39997
by Caroline B. Cooney 
read by Jeanne Evans
1 cassette
Remy and Morgan pay more attention to each other than they do to
the teacher of their driver's ed class, unless they get a chance
to drive. Some people in this class play tricks, like switching
name tags, and one night they decide to steal stop signs. But
disaster strikes and a young mother is left dead. Now the
teenagers must deal with their thoughtless act, their deceit, and
their guilt. For high school and older readers. 1994.
An Echo of Heaven RC 44607
by Kenzaburo Oe 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
2 cassettes
Following the tragic suicides of her two sons in Japan, Marie
Kuraki travels to Mexico to find meaning and solace in Western
religion. Kuraki joins a remote farming community and dedicates
her life to its people, who come to venerate her. Originally
written in 1989. Descriptions of sex. 1996.
Ellen Foster RC 44846
by Kaye Gibbons 
read by Mary Kane
1 cassette
A spunky eleven-year-old tells how she survives a miserable
homelife with an ill, suicidal mother and a mean, alcoholic
father. Her best friend Starletta (a black sharecropper's
daughter), her love of reading, and her resourcefulness keep
Ellen going. Eventually she needs a new home, and even that she
has to find for herself. Bestseller 1987.
Errands RC 43896
by Judith Guest 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
When her husband of seventeen years dies of a brain tumor, Annie
Browner is grief-stricken and frantic to find a job that will
provide for her three children. The Detroit family's troubles
intensify until each member performs an errand of love for the
others. Strong language. 1997.
Evening Class RC 44308
by Maeve Binchy 
read by Anne Flosnik
3 cassettes
For many people in Dublin, life is the same day after day, but
that changes dramatically for forty-eight-year old Aidan Dunne,
when he is passed over for a school principal position. He and
Nora O'Donoghue, just returned from twenty-six years in Italy,
begin teaching Italian in a series of evening classes. Together,
they help many other Dubliners make transitions, too. Some strong
language. Bestseller 1996.
Falling into Glory RC 43359
by Robert Westall 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
At seventeen Robbie Atkinson is a popular, respected rugby star
in his final year of British grammar school. By a series of
chance encounters, he becomes involved with schoolteacher Emma
Harris, whose fiance was killed in World War II. For junior and
senior high and older readers. 1993.
Footprints RC 43395
by Shelby Hearon 
read by Margaret Strom
2 cassettes
After the sudden death of their grown daughter, Doug and Nan
Mayhall confront the long-suppressed conflicts of their marriage.
As Doug takes a young lover, Nan retreats to the security of her
relinquished academic career. It takes another tragic event to
bring healing to the estranged couple. Strong language. 1996.
For Your Eyes Only RC 44417
by Rebecca York 
read by Ilona Dulaski
2 cassettes
Jenny Larkin lost her sight in a car accident in high school. She
blames herself, though no one else does. Ben Brisco has always
loved Jenny, yet never expressed it. Their feelings come to the
surface when Jenny becomes a possible witness in her best
friend's murder. Some descriptions of sex. 1997.
The Fox in the Field: A WWII Novel of India RC 43636
by Maynard Allington 
read by Andrew Seear
2 cassettes
A roguish gambler is pressed by British intelligence to uncover a
1944 German plot to foment anti-British unrest in India. His
espionage involves Kama Sutra interludes with a half-caste lovely
and tense encounters with a ruthless Nazi intelligence agent.
Explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.
The Good Negress RC 43632
by A.J. Verdelle 
read by Connie Winston
2 cassettes
In 1963 Denise Palms is caught between two worlds. She struggles
with caring for her mother's newborn and looking out for her
irresponsible brother, and with her desire to fulfill her
educational ambitions, motivated by her inspiring teacher. Some
descriptions of sex. 1995.
Hanging Up RC 44212
by Delia Ephron 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
As her father lies dying in a nursing home, Eve Mozell thinks
back on her troubled life with him. After her mother left, Eve,
more than her two sisters, had to deal with her father's
drinking, his increasingly erratic behavior, and his constant
phone calls. For seven years she refused to speak with him, but
now he is once more consuming her life. Some strong language.
1995.
Hilda and Pearl RC 43696
by Alice Mattison 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
Preadolescent Frances, growing up in 1950s Brooklyn, is confused
by her complex family and world. When she finds a hidden pair of
baby shoes cherished by her mother, Hilda, Frances unravels a
series of tragic secrets involving her parents, Aunt Pearl, and
her uncle. In time, Frances comes to realize the special bond
that Hilda and Pearl share. Descriptions of sex. 1995.
House Work RC 42314
by Kristina McGrath 
read by Susan McInerney
2 cassettes
Anna and Guy Hallissey and their three children live in
Pittsburgh. As is typical in the 1950s, Anna stays home, keeps
house, and takes care of their children while Guy works at
Radiant Oven Company. But Guy has problems-he stops off to have
drinks on the way home, and he is becoming mentally unstable.
Anna believes that either life is pleasant or it is her job to
make it so. She immerses herself in housework as she struggles to
maintain a happy home. 1994.
How Far Would You Have Gotten If I Hadn't Called You Back? RC
43171
by Valerie Hobbs 
read by Pam Ward
2 cassettes
Sixteen-year-old Bron Lewis's life turns upside down when her
family moves to a small California town. She eventually makes
friends, but they prove to be the wrong kind. And when gentle
Will Harding comes along, Bron has trouble accepting his
earnestness. Some strong language. For junior and senior high
readers. 1995.
Independence Day RC 44192
by Richard Ford 
read by Jamie Horton
4 cassettes
Seven years ago Frank Bascombe, of Sportswriter (RC 37166), got
divorced, yet he is still in his "existence period." Perhaps
things will change this Fourth of July weekend. After a brief
trip to see his longtime girlfriend, who may take him into a
"permanent period," Frank plans to take his son, Paul, fifteen
and recently arrested for shoplifting, to visit several sports
halls of fame. But fate steps in along the way. Strong language.
Bestseller 1995.
Keeping the Good Light RC 43061
by Katherine Kirkpatrick 
read by Carol Dines
1 cassette
Stepping Stones Lighthouse, Long Island Sound, 1903. Eliza Brown,
sixteen, is bored with living in a lighthouse and longs for
friends and adventure. When tragedy strikes her family, Eliza's
life begins to change and her maturity is tested. For junior and
senior high readers. 1995.
The Last Hotel for Women RC 45221
by Vicki Covington 
read by Nanette Savard
2 cassettes
The summer of 1961 in Birmingham upsets life in the Fraley
family. Freedom riders and journalists bring out the worst in
Bull Connor, the city's bigoted Commissioner of Public Safety.
Dinah Fraley, owner of the hotel (formerly a bordello), and her
family suffer the repercussions of Connor's emotional crisis.
Some descriptions of sex, some strong language, and some
violence. 1996.
The Late Child RC 40953
by Larry McMurtry 
read by Dick Jenkins
3 cassettes
Five-year-old Eddie sustains his mother with his sweet and
forthright nature while she reels from the death of her older
daughter. Eddie, his mom, and his aunts journey to New York and
Oklahoma to make sense of their grief and find the meaning of
family. Sequel to The Desert Rose (RC 21771). Strong language and
some explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
Love and Reruns in Adams County  
RC 44545
by Mark Spencer 
read by John Polk
2 cassettes
Lon Peterson returns to his southern Ohio hometown after his
minor-league baseball career and marriage have both failed. His
ex-wife still lives there, working at a fast-food restaurant.
Both lead frustrated lives, continue to be unlucky in love, and
cannot seem to get each other out of their minds. Strong language
and some descriptions of sex. 1993.
The Man without a Face RC 43164
by Isabelle Holland 
read by Erik Sandvold
1 cassette
Receiving no love from his mother or stepsisters, troubled Chuck
Norstadt welcomes the acceptance and affection of Justin McLeod,
a mysterious recluse with a badly scarred face. Chuck is confused
and frightened by his own feelings for Justin. For junior and
senior high readers. 1972.
A Marriage Made at Woodstock  
RC 41563
by Cathie Pelletier 
read by June Carter
3 cassettes
Woodstock. For Fred and Lorraine it was a way of life as well as
a part of the landscape. But now, twenty-one years later, the
love that blossomed there is strained. Fred, onetime
poetry-loving hippie, has turned into a compulsive yuppie, while
Lorraine, now known as Chandra, continues to fight for the
betterment of humanity. Still, Chandra's decision to call the
marriage quits shocks Fred. Strong language. 1994.
Mrs. Ted Bliss RC 43626
by Stanley Elkin 
read by Suzanne Toren
2 cassettes
Mrs. Ted Bliss is an elderly Jewish widow who lives in a Miami
condo. Until now her entire life has been centered on her husband
and children. Gradually, she comes to terms with the death of her
husband and son and with her own identity- as Dorothy Bliss. When
Hurricane Andrew bears down on Miami, she braces for the storm.
1995.
One True Thing RC 40750
by Anna Quindlen 
read by Susan McInerney
2 cassettes
Ellen's father demands her return from a fledgling journalism
career to care for her terminally ill mother. Her two brothers
are in college, and no one else will do. During the months that
follow, Ellen turns into nurse and housekeeper, recognizes her
mother as the "one true thing," and slowly becomes aware of her
father's shortcomings. When the end comes, Ellen is accused of
mercy killing and fights the charge. Strong language. 1994.
Out to Pasture (but Not over the Hill)  RC 41559
by Effie Leland Wilder 
read by Mimi Bederman
1 cassette
Like herself, eighty-five-year-old Wilder's protagonist, Hattie,
is in a home for the elderly. After fourteen months there, Hattie
is compelled to jot down the often amusing and sometimes sad
situations she and her neighbors get into. She uses these notes
to help convince an old college friend, whose name is almost to
"the top of the list," that the home is a good place to live.
1995.
A Private View RC 43262
by Anita Brookner 
read by David Palmer
2 cassettes
Retirement disappointments leave George Bland with an empty life.
The appearance of a brash New Age neighbor sparks long-buried
feelings in Bland. Rekindled, he considers his life and the women
in it, including a lukewarm romance of long ago. Some strong
language and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
The Ranch RC 44312
by Danielle Steel 
read by Laura Giannarelli
3 cassettes
They had been close friends in college, but an incident in their
senior year tore them apart. Now more than twenty years later,
Tanya Thomas, a rock star; Mary Stuart Walker, the wife of a
successful lawyer; and Zoe Phillips, a doctor, come together on a
Wyoming ranch where they reach out to each other again. Some
strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Reality and Dreams RC 44462
by Muriel Spark 
read by Anne Flosnik
1 cassette
Director Tom Richards begins to realize that his life and his
film are spinning out of control. His relationships with his wife
and girlfriend are in peril. His daughters may lose their jobs
and their marriages. One daughter vanishes, making headlines in
the tabloids. Tom begins to feel like a character in one of his
movies. 1996.
A Regular Guy RC 44127
by Mona Simpson 
read by Barbara Caruso
3 cassettes
When Tom and Mary Owens decide to split, Mary takes daughter Jane
to a commune, while Tom strikes it rich in biotechnology. At the
age of ten, Jane is dispatched to live with her wealthy dad. Then
Tom's fortunes fail, and he comes to a new understanding of love
and family. Descriptions of sex and some strong language. 1996.
River of Hidden Dreams RC 43264
by Connie May Fowler 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
Sadie Hunter is a middle-aged woman who takes tourists on boating
excursions in Florida's Key West. She entertains passengers with
stories of her family's heritage and her Native American grand-
mother's doomed love for Sadie's mulatto grandfather. Throughout,
Sadie struggles to commit to her Cuban boyfriend, Carlos. Some
strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
RL's Dream RC 41947
by Walter Mosley 
read by Chuck Young
2 cassettes
Old bluesman Soupspoon has had a lifetime of pain. He grew up in
the Jim Crow South, has now been evicted from his New York
apartment, and has cancer. His free-spirited neighbor, Kiki, who
has her own pain, takes him in and a relationship of compassion
and caring begins. As Soupspoon gets stronger, he tells his story
in the music and words of blues greats, starting with R.L.
Johnson. Violence, strong language, and explicit descriptions of
sex. 1995.
Secrecy RC 44761
by Belva Plain 
read by Jill Ferris
2 cassettes
The factory-owning Dawes brothers have been distinguished
residents of the New England town of Kingsley for years. But when
the stepson of one brother rapes the daughter of the other and
the families try to keep it a secret, the lives of the brothers,
their wives, and the victimized young woman are all damaged. Some
strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Send No Blessings RC 40998
by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor 
read by June Carter
2 cassettes
Beth Herndon, fifteen, lives in a trailer with her parents and
eight brothers and sisters. Beth longs for a better life than her
parents have and hopes her typing ability will be the key to a
better future away from West Virginia. But her father wants Beth
to quit school when she turns sixteen and to marry
twenty-two-year-old Harless. For junior and senior high readers.
1990.
Shadows on the Hudson RC 45102
by Isaac Bashevis Singer 
read by Ken Kliban
5 cassettes
First written in Yiddish and serialized in the Forward in
1957-58, a portrayal of the lives of a group of Jewish refugees 
in New York after World War II. Boris Makaver and his friends
gather to discuss day-to-day events-marriages, affairs, births,
and deaths. Makaver, more religious since the Holocaust, despairs
over the choice of husbands for his only daughter, Anna.
Bestseller 1998.
Snow Angels RC 40845
by Stewart O'Nan 
read by John Lescault
2 cassettes
Annie Marchand, who always had a difficult life, was at one time
Arthur Parkinson's baby-sitter. Their lives were compli- cated by
the death of her small daughter, Tara, whose body was found by
Arthur. When Arthur was fifteen, Annie's husband murdered her.
Each year as Arthur returns to Butler, Pennsylvania, for
Christmas, he relives the events of 1974, hoping to finally
comprehend what happened but knowing he never will. Strong
language. 1994.
Some Girls RC 40619
by Kristin McCloy 
read by Laura Giannarelli
2 cassettes
To the dismay of her rancher lover and her family,
twenty-three-year-old Claire leaves New Mexico to live in New
York City where she knows no one and works for a temp agency. Her
exotic neighbor Jade intrigues her, and eventually the two women
become friends. When the friendship turns sexual one drunken
night, Claire, shocked, avoids Jade while trying to sort out her
feelings. Strong language and some explicit descriptions of sex.
1994.
Songs in Ordinary Time RC 44955
by Mary McGarry Morris 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
5 cassettes
In the summer of 1960, a young Vermont boy, Benjy, sees Earlie
Jones and con man Omar Duvall fighting in the woods near his
home. Earlie is later found dead. When Duvall insinuates himself
into the lives of Benjy's family, Benjy's mother-divorced from
her alcoholic husband-is particularly vulnerable. Strong language
and some violence. Bestseller 1995.
Splitting RC 43250
by Fay Weldon 
read by Ann Hodapp
2 cassettes
Angelica White, former lead singer of a successful rock band,
marries Edwin Rice and settles down on an English estate. She is
betrayed by Edwin, who divorces her and tricks her out of her
fortune. As Angelica's life comes apart, her multiple
personalities vie for control. Some strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 1995.
Summer of Rescue RC 43703
by Barbara Nelson 
read by Ilona Dulaski
2 cassettes
The summer of Clare's fortieth year is stressful. Her teenage
daughter has discovered love and sex, while Clare finds herself
the object of a younger man's fancy. An end-of-summer family
reunion at the lake where her son drowned provides Clare with the
insight she needs to cope. 1994.
Summerspell RC 43526
by Jean Thesman 
read by Mimi Bederman
1 cassette
Fifteen-year-old Jocelyn Tyler lives with her half-sister, Hope,
and Hope's husband, Gerald. But Jocelyn runs away to escape
Gerald's sexual harassment and holes up in her cherished family
cabin, Summerspell. Much to her chagrin, Jocelyn is joined by
Baily, a boy from school, and a stranger named Spider. For junior
and senior high readers. 1995.
The Tin Can Tree RC 44373
by Anne Tyler 
read by Mary Kane
2 cassettes (Reissue)
A novel following the few days after the death of a little girl,
exploring the effects on her older brother, on her mother who
neglects the boy in her grief, and on their neighbors. 1965.
Tunnel of Love RC 40290
by Hilma Wolitzer 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
In this sequel to Hearts, Linda Reismann-twenty-seven, newly
widowed, and pregnant-and Robin, her 
thirteen-year-old stepdaughter, have just arrived in Los Angeles.
They hope to begin a new life and establish a less volatile
relationship. But fate has more trouble in store for
both-robbery, murder, a car accident, and a custody battle.
Strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
Up Island RC 45160
by Anne Rivers Siddons 
read by Carol Dines
3 cassettes
Molly Redwine of Atlanta, Georgia, has never really gotten to
know herself. Her mother dominated Molly's childhood, and since
then her life has been devoted to her family. Now, more than
twenty years later and alone, Molly begins to find herself when
she has the chance to spend the summer on Martha's Vineyard. Some
strong language. Bestseller 1997.
A Virtuous Woman RC 44845
by Kaye Gibbons 
read by Faith Potts
1 cassette
In alternating chapters, Jack and Ruby recount their lives and
marriage. Although they come from very different backgrounds,
they nonetheless have a marriage that lasts twenty-five years
until Ruby dies of lung cancer. Jack continues to miss her months
after her death. Some strong language. Bestseller 1989.
The Voice at the Back Door RC 44342
by Elizabeth Spencer 
read by John Stratton
2 cassettes
Lacey, Mississippi, in the 1950s. The new sheriff, Duncan Harper,
who is chosen because he was a popular college football player,
tries to uphold the law fairly, despite the deep-rooted racial
tensions that divide the citizens. But changes coming to the
South bring conflict and new problems. Some strong language and
some violence. 1956.
We Were the Mulvaneys RC 44100
by Joyce Carol Oates 
read by Bruce Huntey
4 cassettes
The Mulvaneys live an idyllic life on their family farm. Then
their world is shattered on Valentine's Day in 1976, when
daughter Marianne is raped while drinking with a high school
classmate. After that, everything comes apart for the once stable
and close-knit family. Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Wedding RC 40947
by Dorothy West 
read by June Carter
2 cassettes
Harlem Renaissance author Dorothy West writes of the Oval, an
elite black community on Martha's Vineyard during the 1950s. The
Coles, a prominent family, are dismayed that daughter Shelby is
marrying a white jazz musician, a union that raises issues of
race and class. At the same time, womanizer Lute McNeil
desperately wants to gain acceptance by the Oval and is
determined to do so by marrying Shelby himself. Some strong
language. 1995.
The Wisest Man in America RC 41568
by W.D. Wetherell 
read by Phil Regensdorf
2 cassettes
New Hampshire native Ferris and columnist Max Thomas have known
each other since 1952. It was back then, as the two men spent a
day talking, that Thomas realized Ferris understood the way
America was moving and asked him to predict the election results.
Ferris was correct then, and has been correct ever since. Now in
1996, Thomas is back for the latest forecast. As they talk, they
uncover interesting facts about each other. 1995.
A Woman's Place RC 44942
by Barbara Delinsky 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
2 cassettes
Wife, mother, and entrepreneur Clare Raphael is the model of a
successful woman. Then her life is shattered when she is served
with divorce and eviction papers. As Clare struggles for her
rights in a biased court system, she receives needed support and
succor from her business partner. Strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1997.
Humor
Barrel Fever: Stories and Essays 
RC 40676
by David Sedaris 
read by Ray Hagen
2 cassettes
Darkly humorous stories include "Parade," in which the
protagonist claims homosexual affairs with such celebrities as
Mike Tyson and Bruce Springsteen, and "Music for Lovers," in
which a tight-fisted man's homemade casts cause his daughter to
lose her feet. Originally broadcast on NPR, the essay "SantaLand
Diaries" relates Sedaris's most frightening occupation: Christmas
elf at Macy's. Strong language and some explicit descriptions of
sex. 1994.
A Dog's Life RC 44236
by Peter Mayle 
read by Barry Bernson
1 cassette
The author of A Year in Provence 
(RC 33619) presents the autobiography of the "mutt" Boy, who was
abandoned at an early age by his mother, mistreated by his
master, and eventually adopted by the Mayles. Boy tells how he
learned to please and manipulate "the management" and mixes a
lighthearted account of his adventures with advice on dealing
with the human species. Bestseller 1995.
The Free Fall of Webster Cummings  
RC 44365
by Tom Bodett 
read by Rick Rohan
3 cassettes
Webster Cummings defies all odds when he plummets four thousand
feet from an airplane and lives to tell the tale. He becomes
inspired to find his natural parents and goes on to encounter a
series of eccentric characters, each as improbable as his own
miraculous survival, whose lives eventually come together with
his. 1996.
Good Evening Mr. and Mrs. America and All the Ships at Sea RC
43817
by Richard Bausch 
read by Bruce Huntey
3 cassettes
This humorous story set in 1964 Washington, D.C., follows the
antics of Walter Marshall, a naive and devout student of
journalism. Walter believes that his ultimate destiny is the
presidency, and his hapless forays toward manhood leave him
sadder but wiser about the ways of a fast-changing world. Strong
language. 1996.
Infernal Affairs RC 44285
by Jane Heller 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
The night her husband leaves her, overweight, graying, real
estate agent Barbara Chessner unknowingly makes a deal with the
devil. The next morning she wakes up blond and shapely, and she
even makes an impossible sale to a gorgeous man. But when Barbara
learns she's a darksider, she wants her old life back. Some
strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Inimitable Jeeves RC 44504
by P.G. Wodehouse 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes (Reissue)
When a longtime chum of Bertie Wooster falls in love with a girl
at a dance, he asks Bertie to enlist the aid of the incomparable
Jeeves to smooth matters over. 1951.
The Liar RC 43154
by Stephen Fry 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
Follows Adrian Healey through prep school, a brief time spent as
a Piccadilly "rent-boy," his work in smuggling illegal drugs, and
his return to academia at Oxford where he meets Professor
Trefusis, a language instructor. Adrian has spent his life
telling so many lies that he actually begins to believe many of
them. Then he and Professor Trefusis get involved with a caper
regarding a "truth machine." Violence, strong language, and
descriptions of sex. 1991.
The Luck of the Bodkins RC 44490
by P.G. Wodehouse 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes (Reissue)
This tale by the English humorist introduces a group of droll
characters en route to Hollywood on the R.M.S. Atlantic. Combines
fun with three on, off, on-again romances, a model steward, and a
diamond necklace. 1935.
Our Landlady RC 43370
by L. Frank Baum 
read by Terence Aselford
2 cassettes
A collection of humorous stories written around 1890 about life
in South Dakota. Speaking through his fictional landlady, the
creator of Oz comments on railroads, suffrage, prairie populism,
prohibition, and other issues of moment at the time that state
entered the Union. 1996.
Politically Correct Holiday Stories: For an Enlightened Yuletide
Season RC 43421
by James Finn Garner 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
1 cassette
Garner, who wrote Politically Correct Bedtime Stories (RC 38598)
and Once upon a More Enlightened Time 
(RC 40614), now rewrites holiday favorites for the 1990s.
Includes "'Twas the Night before Solstice," "Frosty the Persun of
Snow," and "Rudolph the Nasally Empowered Reindeer." In "A
Christmas Carol," Marley is visited by spiritual facilitators.
Bestseller 1995.
Pudd'nhead Wilson and Those Extraordinary Twins RC 41298
by Mark Twain 
read by Chuck Young
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Two novels by the American humorist. In Pudd'nhead Wilson Twain
provides a complex, ironic, and morally disturbing account of
human nature under slavery as a brilliant and inventive
nineteenth-century lawyer attempts to prove his case by using the
newfangled science of fingerprinting. Those Extraordinary Twins
is about Siamese twins who share many amusing problems. 1894.
Simon's Night RC 44880
by Jon Hassler 
read by Gary Telles
2 cassettes
Retired English professor Simon Shea, seventy-six, recently
checked himself into a home for the aged but then realizes he is
not yet ready to forsake the world. As he reminisces about his
life and past loves, he forms new friendships and is reunited
with his estranged wife. 1979.
Small World: An Academic Romance  RC 44105
by David Lodge 
read by George Holmes
3 cassettes
At his first academic conference, poor Persse McGarrigle sees
that the only bright spot among the fifty-seven lackluster
attendees is the gorgeous Angelica Pabst. Exchanging sexual
repartees with her, he falls in love, and he pursues her
throughout the 1979 conference season, while all around him
academic politics take their toll. Strong language and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1984.
Sunburn RC 40942
by Laurence Shames 
read by Arnie Warren
2 cassettes
Usually Mafia godfathers don't talk, but in quirky Key West,
Vincente Delgatto begins to reminisce so his sons, obnoxious Gino
and illegimate Joey, can understand his life. Meanwhile, the FBI
is watching him for its own reasons. Treachery follows, but the
"Reluctant Godfather" still has zip. Satiric sequel to Florida
Straits (RC 36937). Strong language and some violence. 1995.
Very Good, Jeeves! RC 44515
by P.G. Wodehouse 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Eleven stories about the resourceful Jeeves, manservant to the
irresponsible Bertie Wooster. In these tales Jeeves extricates
Bertie from overwhelming dilemmas. 1930.
Wanda Hickey's Night of Golden Memories and Other Disasters RC
41950
by Jean Shepherd 
read by Michael Kramer
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Shepherd recalls humorous episodes about growing up in the
northern Indiana steel town of Hohman. When the hillbilly Bumpus
family and their 745 dogs move in next door, a stolen Easter ham
results in a Shepherd-Bumpus feud. Later, spiffed-up Jean with
his seven-pound pompadour goes on a disastrous date with a
wealthy classmate. But he manages to top that with a drunken
junior prom fiasco. Strong language. 1971.
Literature
The Book of Lamentations RC 45081
by Rosario Castellanos 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
3 cassettes
A tale of social and racial conflict set in the Mexican state of
Chiapas in 1930. Describes events that precipitate a Mayan Indian
rebellion against the dominant Ladino class. Culminates in a
harrowing, redemptive crucifixion of a child. Originally
published in 1962. Violence and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Fireflies RC 44603
by Shiva Naipaul 
read by Jill Ferris
3 cassettes
Chronicles the family life of three generations of Trinidad's
preeminent Hindu family, the Khojas. Portrays the wisdom, humor,
and tragedy of their daily affairs and depicts special events
including a family festival and a funeral. 1970.
The Following Story RC 43219
by Cees Nooteboom 
read by Steven Carpenter
1 cassette
Herman Mussert, a classics professor and travel writer, falls
asleep in his Amsterdam apartment but awakens in Lisbon in the
very room where once he had a brief affair. He revisits other
scenes of that liaison and then inexplicably embarks on a voyage
to the Amazon. Some strong language. Winner of the 1993 European
Literary Prize for Best Novel. 1993.
The God of Small Things RC 44608
by Arundhati Roy 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
A story of class struggle, family crisis, and coming of age in
Kerala, India. Born to prosperity, twins Estha and Rahel are
isolated from the squalor and political unrest around them. The
events of a single day in 1969 alter their lives and
relationships forever. Descriptions of sex. Booker Prize. 
Bestseller 1997.
Nightwood RC 44449
by Djuna Barnes 
read by Kimberly Schraf
1 cassette
The story of a femme fatale, Robin Vote, whose elusive and
enigmatic spirit ruins the lives of her husband, "Baron"
Volkbein, their child, and Nora and Jenny, the two women who are
obsessed with her. With an introduction by T.S. Eliot. Some
strong language. 1937.
Old New York: Four Novellas RC 42245
by Edith Wharton 
read by Jennifer Mendenhall
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Originally published in 1924, these four stories offer a glimpse
of New York life in the 1840s, 1850s, 1860s, and 1870s and cover
topics dealing with infidelity, illegitimacy, the class system,
and the treatment of women. "False Dawn," set in the 1840s, shows
a father's contempt for a son who does not follow his
instructions to the letter. "New Year's Day," set in the 1870s,
reveals the motivation behind a woman's infidelity. 1924.
Rasero RC 43373
by Francisco Rebolledo 
read by Peter Gil
5 cassettes
Fausto Rasero, mysteriously bald since birth, is a Spaniard
living in eighteenth-century Paris. Clairvoyant upon orgasm and
yearning for wisdom, he struggles to reconcile the optimism of
the Enlightenment with the horrific prophecies of his visions,
which include the Holocaust and the atomic bomb. Some strong
language and descriptions of sex. Winner of the 1994 Pegasus
Prize for Latin American literature. 1995.
A Simple Heart RC 43738
by Gustave Flaubert 
read by Laura Giannarelli
1 cassette
The story of a French housemaid in the mid-1800s who embraces
life in spite of her harsh circumstances. With faith and an inner
strength, she endures a wretched childhood, a failed love, the
tragic death of a nephew, and the loss of her beloved pet bird.
Her end is sad, yet dignified. 1924.
A Son at the Front: With an Introduction by Shari Benstock RC
43601
by Edith Wharton 
read by Christopher Hurt
2 cassettes
Story about American painter John Compton, whose only child,
George, is called to duty in World War I. As Compton and his
ex-wife bicker about protecting their son, George transfers to
the front lines and is killed in battle. His parents are
devastated, but artist Compton experiences an epiphany in his
view of war. 1995.
The Three Daughters of Madame Liang  RC 43147
by Pearl S. Buck 
read by Jill Ferris
2 cassettes (Reissue)
The story of China is portrayed through the eyes of a Shanghai
restaurant owner, Madame Liang. She sends her three daughters to
America to be educated, and they become torn between China and
America. Their emotional and patriotic conflicts frame a story of
turbulence and drama. 1969.
Medical Themes
Brothers RC 43809
by Ben Bova 
read by Andy Chappell
3 cassettes
Dr. Arthur Marshak makes a biomedical discovery that enables the
body to regenerate injured or diseased organs. Some extol it as a
great scientific breakthrough; others see it as blasphemy. When a
scientific court convenes to weigh the merits of his work,
Marshak is pitted against his brother, Jesse, a humanitarian
physician. Some strong language. 1996.
Ebola: A Documentary Novel of Its First Explosion RC 43938
by William T. Close 
read by Jim Zeiger
3 cassettes
Fictional account of the devastating effects of the ebola virus
at the Catholic Mission of Yambuku in Africa. Dr. Close spent
sixteen years in the Republic of Zaire and worked closely with
the Flemish nuns and others who dealt with the disease, which
struck the country in 1976. He recounts the story of a local
teacher who arrived at the clinic with a raging fever and the
tragic results of his visit. Bestseller 1995.
Implant RC 44239
by F. Paul Wilson 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
3 cassettes
New doctor Gina Panzella returns to Washington, D.C., hoping to
work with the congressional medical ethics committee. She also
moonlights with friend Duncan Lathram, a former vascular surgeon.
Duncan is now a plastic surgeon, and odd things are happening to
his congressional patients. Strong language, violence, and
explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
Life Support RC 44835
by Tess Gerritsen 
read by Barbara Pinolini
2 cassettes
As emergency-room doctor Toby Harper investigates the
disappearance of a patient and some unusual deaths, she finds
problems at a wealthy retirement home. Toby's suspicions lead her
to a handsome medical examiner whose findings heighten the
mystery. Meanwhile Toby has ongoing difficulties with her mother,
who has Alzheimer's disease. Some strong language and some
violence. Bestseller 1997.
Mystery and Detective
Artists in Crime RC 43463
by Ngaio Marsh 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
Scotland Yard detective Roderick Alleyn must turn his interest in
the feisty artist, Agatha Troy, from personal to professional. At
Troy's artists' colony, a model is murdered, and Alleyn is called
in to investigate. Suspects abound, including the lovely but
aloof Troy. 1938.
Ashworth Hall: A Thomas and Charlotte Pitt Mystery RC 44638
by Anne Perry 
read by Terry Hayes Sales
3 cassettes
In the autumn of 1890, the country home of Charlotte Pitt's
sister is the setting for a meeting between Protestants and
Catholics to discuss the Irish question. But the negotiations
founder when a Protestant is found in bed with the wife of a
Catholic, and then the chairman is murdered. Superintendent
Thomas Pitt, with his wife's assistance, once again solves the
crime. Bestseller 1997.
The Babysitter III RC 40912
by R.L. Stine 
read by June Carter
1 cassette
In the sequel to Babysitter II (RC 36925), Jenny Jeffers is still
terribly upset about her experience babysitting Donny Hagen.
Donny's father had threatened Jenny by phone and then died while
trying to kill her. Jenny, spending the summer with her cousin
Debra, is not sur- prised when Debra begins receiving calls from
Mr. Hagen while she babysits. Jenny knew he would come back from
the grave. For junior and senior high readers. 1993.
Best Kept Secrets RC 43890
by Sandra Brown 
read by Laura Giannarelli
3 cassettes
Alexandra Gaither has convinced her 
district attorney boss to let her reopen a twenty-five-year-old
murder case in Purcell, Texas. The victim was Alexandra's mother,
Celina, and the suspects are wealthy rancher Angus Minton and
Celina's close friends Junior and Reede Lambert. Strong language
and explicit descriptions of sex. 1989.
Black Ribbon: A Dog-Lover's Mystery  RC 43462
by Susan Conant 
read by Catherine Byers
2 cassettes
A mystery embedded in an encyclopedia of information about
breeding and showing dogs. Holly Winter and her Alaskan malamute,
Rowdy, enjoy Waggin' Tail dog camp, where participants eagerly
compare dogs and exchange gossip. Then the spiteful Eva Spitteler
dies under a collapsing dog-training ramp, and Holly suspects
murder. 1995.
The Black Tower: An Adam Dalgliesh Mystery RC 44163
by P.D. James 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Mystery set in England about convalescent Adam Dalgliesh, who
goes to Dorset and discovers that the priest who had summoned him
is dead. Adam becomes involved in intrigue and murder when more
deaths occur at a nearby home for disabled people. 1975.
The Blond Baboon RC 43182
by Janwillem van de Wetering 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes (Reissue)
In this sequel to Outsider in Amsterdam (RC 43181), detectives
Grijpstra and De Gier are called to the scene of a middle-aged
woman's death-an apparent accident. But factors, such as the dead
woman's wealth and an ex-lover called "Blond Baboon," cause the
pair of sleuths to suspect murder. 1978.
Blood and Thunder: A Nathan Heller Novel RC 43554
by Max Allan Collins 
read by Bruce Huntey
2 cassettes
In this historical mystery set in 1935 Louisiana, detective Nate
Heller is hired to guard Senator Huey Long. When Long is killed,
the uncertain source of the fatal bullet leaves his widow's life
insurance claim in limbo. Heller resolves the matter and unmasks
the killer. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex.
1995.
Blue Lonesome RC 43724
by Bill Pronzini 
read by Christopher Walker
2 cassettes
Every evening Jim Messenger dines 
alone in the Harmony Cafe, where Janet Mitchell, another lonely
soul, catches his fancy. When she commits suicide, Jim sets out
to discover her story. His hunt leads him to a bleak Nevada town,
where he learns Janet's terrible secret. Strong language. 1995.
Born Guilty: A Joe Sixsmith Novel  
RC 43016
by Reginald Hill 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
The black, balding Luton, England, ex-lathe operator, now a
private eye, discovers a boy's body stuffed into a box in the
graveyard. A society matron wants to know what happened. Sixsmith
also has two other cases: Galina Hacker has hired him to find out
why someone is annoying her grandda, and Mavis Dalgety wants her
school chum's teacher investigated. Some strong language. 1995.
Breakheart Hill RC 43922
by Thomas H. Cook 
read by Bob Askey
2 cassettes
A tale of young romance, racism, and tragedy in 1962 rural
Alabama. The town doctor, at the time a high school senior,
recounts events that led to the murder of his first love, a girl
who aroused public passions by embracing the civil rights cause.
Strong language and violence. 1995.
The Brimstone Wedding RC 43587
by Barbara Vine 
read by Ann Hodapp
2 cassettes
Elderly Stella Newland, dying of cancer, is confined to Middleton
Hall, a home for well-off old folks. Genevieve Warner, thirty and
a caregiver there, is very fond of Stella. She confides about her
loveless marriage, even though she doesn't think Stella will
understand. But Stella knows all too well the disaster that lurks
behind the revelations. 1995.
Cadillac Jukebox RC 44093
by James Lee Burke 
read by Bruce Huntey
2 cassettes
Cajun cop Dave Robicheaux gets a call for help from redneck Aaron
Crown, who after twenty-eight years is convicted of killing a
prominent civil rights activist. Though he is warned off the
case, Robicheaux decides to buck the power structure and take
some personal risks to prove Crown's innocence. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Cain His Brother: A William Monk Mystery RC 44539
by Anne Perry 
read by James DeLotel
3 cassettes
Genevieve Stonefield, whose kind and considerate husband of
fourteen years has disappeared, believes that his violent and
outcast twin has murdered him. She has come to William Monk for
help. But in searching out clues, Victorian detective Monk almost
destroys his own name and reputation. 1995.
A Caribbean Mystery RC 44500
by Agatha Christie 
read by Carmella Ross
1 cassette (Reissue)
Miss Marple, vacationing on a Caribbean island, is listening to a
major who is suddenly interrupted as he is about to show her a
photograph of a murderer he has known. The next day the major
dies suspiciously, and several murders occur before Miss Marple
remembers the detail that helps unravel the mystery. 1964.
The Case of the Fugitive Nurse 
RC 44936
by Erle Stanley Gardner 
read by Brian Conn
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Perry Mason takes on the case of Steffanie Malden, the beautiful
widow of a prominent doctor recently killed in a plane crash. It
appears that the victim's money has disappeared along with his
former nurse and girlfriend. As Mason probes, new problems arise,
including an IRS investigation and a murder charge brought
against his client. 1954.
The Case of the Hesitant Hostess  
RC 44668
by Erle Stanley Gardner 
read by Brian Conn
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Perry Mason agrees to defend penniless ex-salesman Albert Brogan
against a charge of armed robbery. But at the last minute,
Perry's star witness, nightclub hostess Inez Kaylor, fails to
appear. To make matters worse, an additional accusation of murder
is levelled against his client. A Perry Mason mystery. 1953.
Cat and Mouse: A Detective Alex Cross Mystery RC 45155
by James Patterson 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
Washington, D.C., detective Alex Cross is again faced with his
nemesis, psychotic killer Gary Soneji from Along Came a Spider
(RC 35894). At the same time, mass murderer Mr. Smith is in
Europe performing live autopsies on his victims. FBI profiler
Thomas Pierce is taken off the European case to assist in
apprehending Soneji after Cross is attacked at home. Violence.
Bestseller 1997.
The Cat Who Tailed a Thief RC 44143
by Lilian Jackson Braun 
read by Bob Askey
2 cassettes
A rash of petty thievery, newcomers in Pickax, a wedding, and a
couple of murders Down Below keep Qwilleran, who has bought a
condo for the winter, and his cats, KoKo and Yum Yum, busy during
the holiday season. Bestseller 1997.
Cha Cha Cha RC 40669
by Jane Heller 
read by Kimberly Schraf
3 cassettes
Alison Koff, thirty-five, lives in an extravagant house and
writes about celebrities for the local paper part-time. Then the
stock market crashes, her husband leaves her for his first wife,
and she is forced to take a job as a maid for visiting writer,
hateful Melanie Moloney. Adjusting to her poor lifestyle and a
new boyfriend, Alison is shocked to be accused of murdering
Moloney. Strong language and explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.
The Chatham School Affair RC 43733
by Thomas H. Cook 
read by Rick Rohan
2 cassettes
In 1926 free-spirited Elizabeth Channing arrives to teach at the
elite Chatham School on Cape Cod. There she has an affair with a
married colleague, provoking scandal, suicide, and a murder that
goes unsolved because of one man's deeply held secret. Violence.
1996.
Chromosome 6 RC 44637
by Robin Cook 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
3 cassettes
The body of a murdered Mafia boss vanishes from the city morgue
and is later recovered in a mutilated condition. A pair of
forensic pathologists trace the mystery to the jungles of
equatorial Africa and uncover a conspiracy to alter the course of
evolution. Strong language and violence. Bestseller 1997.
Clean Break: A Kate Brannigan Mystery  RC 43787
by Val McDermid 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
The Manchester P.I. investigates two crimes. First a Monet is
stolen from an estate that is using Kate's security system, and
Kate feels responsible. Then Trevor Kerr hires Kate to find out
who is trying to blackmail him by sabotaging his Kerrchem
industrial cleaners business. Some strong language. 1995.
Cleopatra Gold: An Alex Delaware Mystery RC 44555
by William J. Caunitz 
read by John Polk
2 cassettes
Alejandro Monahan is an undercover cop working as a nightclub
singer. His father was killed several years ago by the Cleopatra
drug network, and since then Monahan has worked his way into the
syndicate so he can avenge his father's death. When three cops
are killed, Monahan swings into action, unaware that narcotics
has also sent in a female undercover cop. Strong language, some
violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1993.
The Clinic RC 44038
by Jonathan Kellerman 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes
When Hope Devane, psychology professor and author of a
controversial book, is murdered, police detective Milo Sturgis
asks his friend, psychologist Alex Delaware, to help with the
case. Delaware searches for clues by interviewing the troubled
students who came before Devane's Conduct Committee. Strong
language and some violence. Bestseller 1996.
Cold Light RC 43515
by John Harvey 
read by Steven Crossley
2 cassettes
Detective Charlie Resnick is harried with the usual Christmas
crime wave, when a social worker is reported missing. The
evidence points to a psychopathic kidnapper, and Resnick is off
on a race against time to find the victim. A British police
procedural. Strong language. 1994.
The Continental Op RC 42705
by Dashiell Hammett 
read by Gary Telles
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Seven stories that appeared in the magazine Black Mask during the
twenties. They introduce Continental Op, the fat man from the
Continental Detective Agency (modeled after the Pinkerton Agency
where Hammett once worked) and reflect a world of cruelty and
stealth. Some violence. 1923.
The Daughters of Cain RC 43356
by Colin Dexter 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
Chief Inspector Morse is faced with two related murders. When an
Oxford don is found stabbed in his flat, the trail of clues leads
to an unsavory college servant whom the don had sacked. But when
the servant turns up murdered with the same weapon, Morse is left
with a surfeit of suspects and a perplexing mystery. 1994.
Dead Cert RC 44817
by Dick Francis 
read by Bob Askey
2 cassettes
Alan York is in second place in a steeplechase when he watches
the leader, his friend Bill Davidson, and his horse take a bad
fall. Although the course is covered by a thick British fog, York
thinks he sees something suspicious about the way the horse and
rider go down. A close inspection following the race proves he is
right. 1962.
Dead in the Water RC 44806
by Stuart Woods 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
Allison Manning pilots her yacht into St. Mark's Island, claiming
she had to bury her husband at sea after he had a fatal heart
attack. When the minister of justice moves to convict Allison of
murder, a vacationing New York lawyer comes to her defense.
Strong language and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Dead Lagoon: An Aurelio Zen Mystery  RC 43705
by Michael Dibdin 
read by Peter Gil
2 cassettes
Ostensibly inquiring into ghost sightings, Aurelio Zen is in his
hometown of Venice investigating the abduction of an American
businessman. Along the trail, Zen makes some powerful enemies,
both criminal and political, who complicate his work and
jeopardize his life. Strong language and violence. 1994.
Death at the President's Lodging  
RC 44344
by Michael Innes 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
When Josiah Umpleby of England's St. Anthony's College is
murdered, the faculty members attempt to throw suspicion on one
another, leaving Inspector John Appleby with too much evidence.
1936.
Death of a Hawker RC 44832
by Janwillem van de Wetering 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
Normally placid Newmarket Square is shaken by the discovery of a
street vendor's body, his head bludgeoned. Amsterdam detectives
Grijpstra and de Gier narrow the field to two suspects: the
sister of the deceased and a house boarder. Then a reluctant
witness helps to finger the culprit. Violence. 1977.
The Death of an Ardent Bibliophile: A Peter McGarr Mystery RC
44570
by Bartholomew Gill 
read by Andy Chappell
2 cassettes
When the curator of prestigious Marsh's Library is found naked
and dead among his books, detective Peter McGarr investigates. In
the course of his probe, McGarr discovers a bizarre world of
literary pornography, avarice, and murder. Strong language and
violence. 1995.
The Death of Friends RC 44671
by Michael Nava 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
Attorney Henry Rios is shocked when a scared young man who claims
to be the lover of Henry's law school friend, L.A. Superior Court
judge Chris Chandler, describes finding Chris dead. Unlike Henry,
Chris vowed never to "come out of the closet." Why hadn't he told
Henry that he had left his wife and son for a man? And did one of
them kill him? Strong language and some descriptions of sex.
1996.
Deception on His Mind RC 44764
by Elizabeth George 
read by Patricia Kilgarriff
5 cassettes
British detective Sergeant Barbara Havers probes the murder of a
wealthy Pakistani immigrant in a sleepy Essex resort town. As the 
community liaison in the ethnically sensitive case, Havers must
bridge a cultural gulf to solve the complex investigation. Strong
language, violence, and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Déjà Dead RC 44763
by Kathy Reichs 
read by Anne Hancock
3 cassettes
Forensic anthropologist Temperance Brennan detects evidence of a
serial killer when she examines a woman's sexually mutilated
body. Frustrated by the slow pace of the police investigation,
Brennan probes the crimes on her own and becomes the target of a
murderous psychopath. Strong language and violence. Bestseller
1997.
Done Wrong: A Marti MacAlister Mystery RC 43521
by Eleanor Taylor Bland 
read by Dani Carr
2 cassettes
It's been three years since Chicago narc Johnny MacAlister's
supposed suicide. His widow, Marti, has moved with her two
children to quiet Lincoln Prairie, where she works as a cop, and
they struggle to get on with their lives. Now another Chicago
policeman dies, and his widow suggests a connection to Johnny's
death. Some strong language. 1995.
The Dreadful Lemon Sky RC 44341
by John D. MacDonald 
read by John Stratton
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Soon after Travis McGee's old friend Carrie Milligan entrusts him
with an unexplained bag of cash, she dies suspiciously. When
McGee sets out to find the truth about the money and Carrie's
death, he is led into a sordid world of blackmail, corruption,
and personal peril. Includes new introduction by Carl Hiassen to
this 1974 mystery. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of
sex. 1995.
The Echo RC 44313
by Minette Walters 
read by Patricia Kilgarriff
2 cassettes
Wealthy architect Amanda Powell discovers that homeless Billy
Blake has died in her garage. Journalist Michael Deacon is
puzzled by Powell's interest in Blake, especially after learning
her husband has been missing for five years. He teams up with an
odd colleague and with a friend of Blake's to find out more about
the man. Some strong language. 1997.
Escapade RC 43522
by Walter Satterthwait 
read by Christopher Walker
3 cassettes
In 1921 Arthur Conan Doyle and Harry Houdini are among the guests
summoned for a seance at a stately Devon manor house. Pinkerton
agent Phil Beaumont is hired to protect Houdini from Chin Soo, a
rival magician. Ghost sightings, attempted murder, and an
apparent suicide make a plot in which suspects and secrets
abound. 1995.
The Estate of the Beckoning Lady  
RC 45113
by Margery Allingham 
read by David Palmer
2 cassettes
Author William Faraday dies in his room at the Beckoning Lady in
Suffolk. At approximately the same time, another man has his head
bashed in and now lies in a deep ditch. His body is not
discovered for eight days. Albert Campion, on holiday in the
area, thinks the two deaths are related. And Old Harry, a local
resident, predicts a third death. 1955.
Farewell, My Lovely: A Phillip Marlowe Mystery RC 41976
by Raymond Chandler 
read by Conrad Feininger
2 cassettes
Los Angeles in the 1930s. A redheaded warbler named Velma is the
only connection hard-boiled investigator Philip Marlowe has to
Moose Malloy. Malloy is six feet five inches tall, about as wide
as a beer truck, and wanted for murder. The trail to Malloy is
strewn with cops and dames and leads right through the gambling
rackets. Violence and strong language. 1940.
The Five Red Herrings RC 44340
by Dorothy L. Sayers 
read by Tom Martin
3 cassettes (Reissue)
Though Kirkcudbright, a proud Scottish village, was not
ordinarily tolerant of outsiders, Lord Peter Wimsey always felt
welcome. Then one day the village offered him something in his
own line 
of work-a corpse. 1931.
The Gemini Contenders RC 43406
by Robert Ludlum 
read by Gary Telles
3 cassettes (Reissue)
A small vault with rare documents that could shatter the
civilized world is smuggled from an ancient monastery in Greece
to the Italian Alps at the beginning of World War II. The only
clue to its hiding place lies with a wealthy anti-Nazi who last
moved the vault. Strong language, violence, and explicit
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1976.
Gladly, the Cross-Eyed Bear: A Matthew Hope Mystery RC 44572
by Ed McBain 
read by Ray Foushee
2 cassettes
No longer a cuddly plaything, Gladly, a teddy bear, is first the
subject of a copyright trial and then a possible motive for
murder. After recovering from a gunshot wound in There Was a
Little Girl 
(RC 40487), Matthew Hope defends Lainie, a beautiful, but
questionable, toy designer. Violence, strong language, and
explicit descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Goddess Affair RC 45124
by Lillian O'Donnell 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
2 cassettes
Private investigator Gwenn Ramadge is hired to find out who is
robbing guests on a cruise ship. While on board she meets Minerva
Aldrich, who (along with her sisters) inherited her late mother's
prestigious dress company, Goddess Designs. When terminally ill
Minerva is found dead in the pool, Ramadge's investigation
expands to murder. 1996.
Gone Fishin' RC 43412
by Walter Mosley 
read by Phil Regensdorf
1 cassette
Prequel to Devil in a Blue Dress 
(RC 32935). In 1939, Easy Rawlins and Mouse are two young men on
a reckless road trip to wring money out of Mouse's loathsome
stepfather. Their path to manhood is crossed by violence, lust,
and tragedy. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
The Grilling Season RC 45060
by Diane Mott Davidson 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Goldy Schulz, the only caterer in Aspen Meadow, Colorado, gets
set to cater Patricia McCracken's Stanley Cup party. But Patricia
also wants Goldy's help in getting revenge against Dr. John
Richard Korman-Goldy's ex-husband and Patricia's ob-gyn. When the
doctor's current girlfriend is found dead, Patricia may get her
wish. Some strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Happy Never After RC 43578
by Kathy Hogan Trocheck 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Sometime-sleuth Callahan Garrity takes time from her
housecleaning business to look for a missing member of the
VelvetTeens, a 1960s music group planning a comeback. Then Stuart
Hightower, the group's hated former producer, is found dead.
VelvetTeen Rita Fontaine lies drunk nearby, the murder weapon in
her hand. Strong language. 1995.
Hearts and Bones RC 43725
by Margaret Lawrence 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
Discovery of a woman's beaten, raped body by midwife Hannah
Trevor shocks the town of Rufford, Maine, in 1786. There is also
a letter of accusation, naming Hannah's lover, penned by the
victim just before her death. Joining in the investigation,
Hannah follows a sinuous trail of clues to the murderer. Violence
and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Hercule Poirot's Christmas RC 44355
by Agatha Christie 
read by Tom Martin
2 cassettes (Reissue)
As the holiday guest of Colonel Johnson, chief constable of his
county, the little Belgian detective Poirot spends his Christmas
investigating the brutal and baffling murder of rich, eccentric
old Simeon Lee. 1938.
The Hills of Homicide RC 41471
by Louis L'Amour 
read by Gary Telles
2 cassettes
The noted western writer presents eight of his "hard-boiled"
detective stories. In the title story, a private eye is sent to
the small western town of Ranagat to clear Blacky Caronna of
wealthy Jack Bitner's murder. Three other stories feature Kip
Morgan, a prize-fighter turned private investigator. L'Amour
includes an author's note with most of the stories. Some strong
language and some violence. 1983.
Hornet's Nest RC 43749
by Patricia Cornwell 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
Police chief Judy Hammer, deputy chief Virginia West, and young
reporter Andy Brazil are perplexed by a serial killer who paints
his victims' genitals orange. Pursuing a trail of odd clues, the
trio tracks and brings down the culprit in a perilous climax.
Strong language and violence. Bestseller 1996.
Hotel Paradise RC 44447
by Martha Grimes 
read by Annie Wauters
3 cassettes
Twelve-year-old Emma narrates this mystery and coming-of-age
novel as she searches for the truth about the death of another
young girl forty years earlier. The setting-a dilapidated
ninety-eight-room hotel on the edge of a woods near an
Appalachian lake-and several eccentric inhabitants of the area
add to the atmosphere of intrigue. 1996.
How I Spent My Summer Vacation: An Amanda Pepper Mystery RC 45044
by Gillian Roberts 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
Philadelphia teacher Amanda Pepper, previously in Caught Dead in
Philadelphia (RC 37547), is invited to vacation in Atlantic City
with her friend Sasha Berg. Sasha later finds a dead man in her
bed and is arrested for murder. With the help of Amanda's police
boyfriend and some colorful locals, Amanda hunts for the real
killer. 1994.
The Hyde Park Headsman: A Thomas and Charlotte Pitt Mystery RC
44549
by Anne Perry 
read by Terry Hayes Sales
3 cassettes
In the spring of 1890, three men have been beheaded in Hyde Park,
and newly promoted police superintendent Thomas Pitt is being
pressured to solve the case. Since his wife Charlotte is involved
with the move to their new home, and his sister-in-law is busy
working on her husband's election to Parliament, Pitt must do
most of the work himself. Some violence. 1994.
If I'd Killed Him When I Met Him...: An Elizabeth MacPherson
Novel RC 44478
by Sharyn McCrumb 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Forensic anthropologist Elizabeth MacPherson helps her attorney
brother, Bill, in a bigamy-murder case that echoes a long-ago
arsenic poisoning in the defendant's family. Meanwhile Bill's
partner, A.P., defends a woman who killed her arrogant ex-husband
and his new wife. 1995.
An Imperfect Spy RC 44915
by Amanda Cross 
read by Barbara Caruso
1 cassette
When Kate Fansler and her husband become visiting professors at
Schuyler Law School, they have more than academic matters to
consider. Dismayed by the rampant sexism on campus, Kate looks
into the suspicious death of a feminist professor and the
conviction of a battered faculty wife for murder. 1995.
In the Dead of Summer: An Amanda Pepper Mystery RC 45217
by Gillian Roberts 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
Philadelphia high school English teacher Amanda Pepper is grumpy
about teaching summer school until she meets her one enthusiastic
pupil, a Vietnamese girl, April Truong. Then a series of hate
crimes and April's apparent abduction force Amanda into her
sleuth mode. Some violence. 1995.
Invasion of Privacy: A John Francis Cuddy Mystery RC 44336
by Jeremiah Healy 
read by Nick Sullivan
2 cassettes
Boston P.I. John Cuddy is hired by Russian immigrant banker Olga
Evorova to investigate her boyfriend, Andrew Dees. Although she
loves Dees, she is concerned because he won't discuss his past
and may just be after her money. Cuddy's interrogation of Dees's
neighbors has unexpected results. Strong language, some violence,
and some descriptions of sex. 1996.
Jack and Jill: A Detective Alex Cross Mystery RC 43318
by James Patterson 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
When a United States senator is shot dead in his home, the sole
clue is a cryptic poem signed "Jack and Jill." More murders
follow, and detective Alex Cross is caught up in a frantic race
to stop the killers before they reach the president. Strong
language, violence, and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
The Japanese Corpse RC 44676
by Janwillem van de Wetering 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
When a waitress reports the disappearance of her Japanese art
dealer boyfriend, Amsterdam detectives Grijpstra and de Gier
launch a search that turns up his corpse. The trail of evidence
leads the two investigators into the closed and mysterious world
of the yakusa, Japan's Mafia. Violence. 1977.
Justice: A Peter Decker/Rina Lazarus Mystery RC 43862
by Faye Kellerman 
read by Richard Davidson
3 cassettes
The brutal murder of a prom queen raises detective Peter Decker's
fears for the safety of his own daughter. Although he can make a
solid case against the cold-eyed nephew of a mobster, the package
is too neat. Disturbing questions remain unanswered. Strong
language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
The King of Babylon Shall Not Come against You RC 43875
by George Garrett 
read by Christopher Walker
3 cassettes
Novel set in 1993. Reporter Billy Tone returns to Paradise
Springs, Florida, to research crimes that took place there during
the week civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. was
assassinated. The tale is told through the voices-sometimes
cynical-of participants and witnesses. Strong language, violence,
and descriptions of sex. 1996.
The King's Bishop: An Owen Archer Mystery RC 43893
by Candace Robb 
read by Vanessa Maroney
3 cassettes
In 1367 King Edward III dispatches Owen Archer on a covert
mission to persuade two major abbeys to support the king's choice
for bishop of Winchester. When his mission is interrupted by
murder and his friend stands accused, Archer follows a path of
clues that leads him back to the royal court. Violence. 1996.
The Lady in the Lake: A Philip Marlowe Mystery RC 42315
by Raymond Chandler 
read by Conrad Feininger
2 cassettes (Reissue)
A swaggering businessman hires hard-boiled Philip Marlowe to find
his wife, who has been missing for a month. She sent her husband
a note to say she was running off to remarry, but her "intended"
denies seeing her. When a woman's body is pulled from the lake
where the wife had been staying and the caretaker's wife also
turns out to be missing, Marlowe begins expertly piecing the
puzzle together. Some strong language and some violence. 1943.
The Laws of Our Fathers RC 43768
by Scott Turow 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
5 cassettes
A probation officer is arrested after his mother is killed in a
drive-by shooting. The confusing case comes before Judge Sonny
Klonsky, who knows the victim, the accused, and the defense
attorney from her college days. As the trial progresses, Sonny
also becomes reacquainted with an old beau. Strong language, some
violence, and some descriptions of sex. 1996.
Lieberman's Day: An Abe Lieberman Mystery RC 43331
by Stuart Kaminsky 
read by Richard Davidson
2 cassettes
Aging police detective Lieberman and his partner, William
Hanrahan, bring their own kind of justice to two criminals: a
robber who kills Lieberman's nephew, David, and wounds David's
pregnant wife; and an abusive husband whose wife and son have
taken refuge with Hanrahan. Some violence and some strong
language. 1994.
A Little Yellow Dog RC 40994
by Walter Mosley 
read by Phil Regensdorf
2 cassettes
It is 1963 and Easy Rawlins has given up the mean streets for a
steady job and a stable life with his adopted kids. But when he
tries to help a woman in distress, his security is shattered, and
he must go back to the streets to clear his name. Strong
language, violence, and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Local Rules RC 44230
by Jay Brandon 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
When vacationing former assistant D.A. Jordan Marshall mouths off
when caught speeding, he is taken to the local judge, who asks
him to handle the defense in an attempted murder case. Marshall
can't understand the importance of the case until he learns of a
connected death-the town's young golden girl. Some strong
language and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
The Long Goodbye: A Phillip Marlowe Mystery RC 42704
by Raymond Chandler 
read by Conrad Feininger
2 cassettes
Something about Terry Lennox gets to hard-boiled Philip Marlowe:
maybe the scars along his face, maybe the lost quality. When
Lennox shows up with a gun, implies his wife lies murdered, and
asks to be driven to Mexico, Marlowe doesn't want too many
answers. But the intrigue and layers of deceit are only
beginning, and Marlowe must untangle the tightly woven threads.
Some violence and some strong language. 1953.
Maigret and the Millionaires RC 44516
by Georges Simenon 
read by Gordon Gould
1 cassette (Reissue)
A rich British colonel is found dead in his bath, while his
mistress vanishes mysteriously from her hospital bed. Inspector
Maigret is off to the champagne playgrounds of the wealthy on a
case he would much rather avoid. 1974.
Malice Prepense RC 43593
by Kate Wilhelm 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
In this sequel to The Best Defense 
(RC 39424), lawyer Barbara Halloway defends Teddy Wendover, who
has mental retardation, in a murder charge. When the evidence
clears Teddy, suspicion shifts to his father, who has a motive.
In a tense courtroom contest, Halloway uncovers several other
links. 1996.
The Mamur Zapt and the Donkey-Vous: A Suspense Tale of Old Cairo
RC 43017
by Michael Pearce 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
Following The Mamur Zapt and the Night of the Dog, Captain Owen
is mystified by the silence that accompanies the disappearance of
Octave Moulin, an elderly Frenchman, from a famous Cairo hotel.
When word comes that Moulin's wife is coming to Cairo, his
girlfriend is spirited away. Then a ransom note appears. But no
one admits to seeing anything awry, not even the usually
observant donkey rental boys. 1990.
The Mamur Zapt and the Girl in the Nile  RC 43018
by Michael Pearce 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
In this sequel to The Mamur Zapt and the Men Behind (RC 42884),
Captain Owen goes to examine the body of a young woman who fell
off Prince Narouz's boat while it was moored. But the corpse is
missing, and the prince denies any knowledge of the drowning
victim. Now the captain's investigation pits him against his
superiors, the prince, the Cairo underground, the colonial
government, and his girlfriend. 1992.
The Mamur Zapt and the Spoils of Egypt  RC 43019
by Michael Pearce 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
Mamur Zapt, head of Cairo's secret police, is piqued when asked
to keep an eye on Miss Skinner, an outspoken American whose cause
it is to keep priceless antiquities in Egypt. But when two
serious accidents nearly befall his charge, Zapt wonders if her
inquiries are exposing dangerous truths. Sequel to The Mamur Zapt
and the Girl in the Nile 
(RC 43018). 1992.
The Man in the Brown Suit RC 44356
by Agatha Christie 
read by Patricia Kilgarriff
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Pretty Anne Beddingfeld witnesses the death of a man when he
falls on the tracks at a London tube station. She also observes a
man in a brown suit who examines the body and drops a piece of
paper as he hurries away. 1924.
The Man Who Cast Two Shadows 
RC 43274
by Carol O'Connell 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Suspended for shooting a suspect, NYPD sergeant Kathleen Mallory
hears on the news that she's been strangled. Mallory moves into
the real victim's apartment building to sort out the confusion
and pursues a string of clues into a world of illusion and
horror. Strong language and violence. 1995.
McNally's Gamble RC 44593
by Lawrence Sanders 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
As chief of discreet inquiries in his father's law firm, Archy
McNally investigates the validity of a Fabergé Imperial egg.
Client Edythe Westmore wants to buy the egg as an investment, but
her children are strongly opposed. McNally uncovers greed,
passion, and murder amidst the residents of Palm Beach. Some
strong language. Bestseller 1997.
The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes 
RC 43001
by Arthur Conan Doyle 
read by John Horton
3 cassettes
Follows the Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (RC 17437). Doyle
offers eleven more tales of Holmes and Dr. Watson, including
Holmes's meeting with Moriarty, the Napoleon of crime. In a final
note, Doyle explains Holmes's demise. Includes a chronology of
Doyle's work and an introduction by editor Christopher Roden.
1993.
A Monstrous Regiment of Women  
RC 43358
by Laurie R. King 
read by Carmella Ross
2 cassettes
In this sequel to The Beekeeper's Apprentice (RC 39416),
detective Mary Russell is in London when she happens upon her
friend Veronica, who has joined a feminist religious temple that
attracts wealthy young women, some of whom meet untimely ends.
Mary goes underground on the case and finds more danger than she
expected. 1995.
Mrs. Malory: Death of a Dean 
RC 44741
by Hazel Holt 
read by Carmella Ross
1 cassette
Sheila Malory arrives in Stratford to visit her actor friend
David and finds him worried about his finances. After the sudden
deaths of his brother and their childhood nanny, David is free to
sell a valuable piece of property, but he is also suspected of
murder. Mrs. Malory decides to help. 1996.
Mrs. Pollifax and the Lion Killer  
RC 44902
by Dorothy Gilman 
read by Suzanne Toren
1 cassette
Kadi Hopkirk, whose missionary parents were killed in Ubangiba,
Africa, has received an urgent request from her childhood friend
Sammat for help in maintaining peace in his country. Ubangiba is
plagued by murders that resemble lion maulings-but there are no
lions in Ubangiba. Mrs. Pollifax refuses to let Kadi go alone, so
they are off to Africa to help Sammat. Some violence. 1996.
Mrs. Pollifax Pursued RC 44901
by Dorothy Gilman 
read by Suzanne Toren
1 cassette
Henry Bidwell is kidnapped. Meanwhile, Kadi Hopkirk, chased by
men in a dirty white van with a misspelled company name on it, is
hiding in Mrs. Pollifax's storage closet. At first there seems to
be no connection. But when Mrs. Pollifax discovers Kadi and tries
to take her home, they find themselves running for their
lives-because of Henry Bidwell. 1995.
Murder at the National Gallery  
RC 44805
by Margaret Truman 
read by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
Luther Mason, curator at the National Gallery for more than
twenty years, is finally getting the Caravaggio exhibit he has
dreamed of. But Luther also has other visions-he plans to keep
one of the original paintings and substitute a forgery. Some
violence. Bestseller 1996.
Murder in the House RC 45084
by Margaret Truman 
read by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
Paul Latham, a longtime member of the House of Representatives,
is nominated to be secretary of state. No one expects any
problems with his confirmation hearing until one of his staffers
files sexual harassment charges against him. When the congressman
is found dead of an apparent suicide, many questions arise. Some
strong language. 1997.
My Gal Sunday RC 43179
by Mary Higgins Clark 
read by Pam Ward
1 cassette
Stories featuring a husband-and-wife team of amateur sleuths.
Henry Britland is a former U.S. president who is married to a
younger congresswoman nicknamed Sunday. Their cases include
finding out who really killed the girlfriend of Henry's secretary
of state. Bestseller 1996.
The Night Crew RC 44311
by John Sandford 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
As Anna Batory and her TV camera crew patrol the nocturnal
streets of Los Angeles, the night turns deadly. Following the
filming of a drugged teen's suicide and the mysterious death of
her cameraman, Anna realizes that she is the next target of a
psychotic killer. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of
sex. Bestseller 1997.
Nightmare in Pink RC 44330
by John D. MacDonald 
read by John Stratton
1 cassette (Reissue)
Travis McGee's case involves his best friend's sister's fiancé,
who is murdered. Upon investigation, McGee uncovers a gigantic
swindle that centers around a seventy-million-dollar fortune.
Some strong language. 1964.
The Nun's Tale: An Owen Archer Mystery RC 43894
by Candace M. Robb 
read by Vanessa Maroney
3 cassettes
In fourteenth-century England, a woman who claims the identity of
a deceased nun is trading in stolen relics and miracles. When she
is linked to a series of deaths and treason against the crown,
Owen Archer is called to investigate. Violence. 1995.
Outrageous Fortune RC 44872
by Patricia Wentworth 
read by Corrie James
2 cassettes
Is he Jimmy Riddell or Jim Randal? Following an accident on a
coastal steamer headed to Scotland, he was rescued and taken to
the hospital. In a semiconscious state, he keeps muttering the
name Jimmy Riddell, and that is the name the hospital advertises
when looking for relatives. Two women come to claim him, and soon
a picturesque village becomes a crime scene. 1933.
The Outside Man RC 44157
by Richard North Patterson 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
Ever since attorney Adam Shaw migrated from the North to his new
southern home, he has felt like a stranger. Then his best friend
disappears, and the friend's wife is found dead. Shaw aims to
solve the crime and risks everything to penetrate the social
facade that conceals the mystery. Strong language and violence.
1981.
Outsider in Amsterdam RC 43181
by Janwillem van de Wetering 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Detective Grijpstra and Sergeant De Gier of the Amsterdam police
investigate the apparent suicide of a shady restaurant owner. But
as new evidence surfaces, the case turns into a puzzling mystery
with a surfeit of suspects. 1975.
Panama RC 43372
by Eric Zencey 
read by Gary Telles
3 cassettes
The year is 1892, and historian Henry Adams is researching a book
in France, where he meets artist Miriam Talbott. Adams soon
learns of Talbott's reported death-but the body turns out not to
be hers. Adams pursues the trail of the missing artist and is
drawn into an intrigue involving the failed Panama Canal plan.
1995.
Paragon Walk: A Thomas and Charlotte Pitt Mystery RC 43241
by Anne Perry 
read by Terry Hayes Sales
2 cassettes
In the posh street of Paragon Walk in Victorian London, a young
woman is brutally raped and murdered. Inspector Thomas Pitt and
his wife, Charlotte, must penetrate the highbrow facades of the
suspects before they can uncover the scandal and prevent more
killing. Violence. 1981.
Pay Dirt; or, Adventures at Ash Lawn  RC 42960
by Rita Mae and Sneaky Pie Brown 
read by Laura Giannarelli
2 cassettes
The tiny town of Crozet, Virginia, is abuzz with strange
happenings. A wild, leather-clad biker is found murdered just
after he arrives in town, and a computer virus causes a
two-million-dollar shortfall at the local bank. A sagacious team
of house pets untangles the mysteries of murder and money. Strong
language. 1995.
Pentecost Alley: A Thomas and Charlotte Pitt Mystery RC 44224
by Anne Perry 
read by Terry Hayes Sales
3 cassettes
As a Scotland Yard superintendent, Pitt rarely gets calls at 2:00
AM to inspect a crime scene. But a Whitechapel prostitute has
been murdered just after the days of Jack the Ripper. Although
the evidence points to Finlay Fitzjames, son of a wealthy,
powerful, and dangerous man, Pitt gets a confession from the
victim's pimp. Then after his execution, a similar murder occurs.
1996.
A Piece of Justice RC 41567
by Jill Paton Walsh 
read by June Carter
2 cassettes
Cambridge University nurse Imogen Quy, from The Wyndham Case (RC
38919), becomes involved in another mystery. Her lodger, student
Fran Bullion, has been asked to write a biography of a Cambridge
mathematician, Gideon Summerfield. Although Summerfield appears
to have been a bit of a bore, each of his previous biographers
has mysteriously died or disappeared. Imogen's own project,
quiltmaking, provides an intriguing clue. 1995.
A Plague of Kinfolks: A Kate Mulcay Mystery RC 43520
by Celestine Sibley 
read by Michele Schaeffer
2 cassettes
Atlanta reporter Kate Mulcay loves her log cabin and rustic
solitude, but the peace is broken when her homeless kinfolk
arrive. Then an old man disappears, a neighbor is murdered, and
Kate is a suspect. Some strong language. 1995.
Plum Island RC 44551
by Nelson DeMille 
read by Fred Major
4 cassettes
While NYPD detective John Corey is recuperating from wounds on
Long Island, two research biologists are found shot on nearby
Plum Island. Corey joins the case and finds himself in a perilous
world of germ warfare, buried treasure, avarice, and murder.
Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex. Bestseller
1997.
The Poet RC 44935
by Michael Connelly 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
3 cassettes
Crime reporter Jack McEvoy decides to probe the apparent suicide
of his brother, a police officer, when the official inquiry bogs
down. McEvoy doggedly follows a trail of clues that leads to a
vicious cop killer with a morbid penchant for poetry. Strong
language, violence, and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Postern of Fate RC 44323
by Agatha Christie 
read by Patricia Kilgarriff
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Tommy and Tuppence Beresford, new residents of a charming old
dream house, find a chilling message about the murder of a former
resident stuck in a book. The solution to the ancient crime lies
behind a dreaded gate known as the Postern of Fate. Bestseller
1973.
Prayers for the Dead: A Peter Decker/Rina Lazarus Novel RC 43860
by Faye Kellerman 
read by Richard Davidson
3 cassettes
When renowned Dr. Azor Sparks is found brutally murdered in an
alley, LAPD detective Peter Decker gets the case. Decker's probe
reveals that Sparks's secret life belied his upright image and
made him some powerful and dangerous enemies. The trail of clues
leads to Decker's own family. Strong language and violence. 1996.
Princess Charming RC 44680
by Jane Heller 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Since her divorce, Elaine Zimmerman mistrusts men and has no
interest in romance. So she is not thrilled when her two friends
drag her on a Caribbean cruise. Her qualms disappear when she
meets appealing tablemate Sam Peck, but return when she learns
that either she or one of her friends has been targeted for
murder by an ex-husband. Some strong language. 1997.
The Quality of Mercy RC 45094
by Faye Kellerman 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
4 cassettes
Elizabethan London. Young playwright Will Shakespeare is
distraught over the murder of his mentor. Rebecca Lopez, the
daughter of Queen Elizabeth I's physician, is a Jew whose family
rescues other Jews from Portugal's Inquisition. When Will and
Rebecca meet, they vow to help each other in their quests for
justice. Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions of
sex. 1989.
Ransom for an Angel: A Jeremy Ransom/Emily Charters Mystery  
RC 43153
by Fred W. Hunter 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
2 cassettes
Chicago detective Ransom, happiest soaking in a tub and reading
Dickens, is attracted to Angela Stephens but can't help her. A
fortune-teller has predicted Angela's murder and described the
killer as Angela's husband. When Angela is strangled, though, her
husband doesn't seem to have a motive, and Ransom can't believe
he's guilty. Some strong language. 1995.
Rescue RC 44739
by Jeremiah Healy 
read by Nick Sullivan
2 cassettes
When Boston private eye John Cuddy stops to change a flat for a
young woman and her ten-year-old companion Eddie, he makes a
promise to find the boy should he ever get lost. When Cuddy later
learns of the woman's murder and Eddie's disappearance, he takes
up the search, which leads him to a church compound in the
Florida Keys. Some strong language. 1995.
The Return of Sherlock Holmes  
RC 43002
by Arthur Conan Doyle 
read by John Horton
3 cassettes (Reissue)
Ten years after the fictional death of Sherlock Holmes, Doyle
bows to public pressure and breathes new life into his creation.
Using incidents from his own life, Doyle provides thirteen
adventures for his amateur detective and Holmes's frequently
baffled colleague, Dr. Watson. Includes a chronology of Doyle's
work and an introduction by editor Richard Lancelyn Green. 1993.
Rosemary Remembered RC 43524
by Susan Wittig Albert 
read by Faith Potts
2 cassettes
When China Bayles finds CPA Rosemary Robbins murdered, the
suspects include a wife-killer, a boyfriend, and angry clients.
China's lover goes off in pursuit of the wrong suspect, leaving
the imperiled China to solve the crime with the aid of spiritual
forces. 1995.
The Rosewood Casket RC 43475
by Sharyn McCrumb 
read by L.J. Ganser
2 cassettes
Randall Stargill wants to leave this world in a handmade coffin
and calls his sons to his Tennessee home to build one out of
rosewood he has stored in the barn. Before Randall dies, though,
old friend Nora Bonesteel delivers a box of dark secrets she says
Randall would want buried with him. 1996.
Sandra Nichols Found Dead RC 43885
by George V. Higgins 
read by Gregory Gorton
2 cassettes
When Sandra Nichols is found murdered, her ex-husband is charged
with wrongful death, and attorney Jerry Kennedy agrees to try the
case. Kennedy becomes guardian for the orphaned children,
sedulously gathers the needed evidence, and assails the
ex-husband's alibi. Strong language. 1996.
Saratoga Fleshpot RC 43091
by Stephen Dobyns 
read by James DeLotel
2 cassettes
P.I. Charlie Bradshaw's buddy Victor Plotz knows the colt
Fleshpot is a ringer when it refuses to take the trademark nip at
Vic's backside. Then the inept man hired by legal enemies to
shadow Vic turns up dead; Vic is accused; and the real Fleshpot
has to be rescued. A mix of sleuthing and humor. 1995.
Second Skin RC 44827
by Eric Lustbader 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
4 cassettes
In this sequel to Floating City 
(RC 39345), Mafia boss Mick Leonforte schemes to take over the
Japanese underworld from an old friend of Nicholas Linnear.
Linnear's own livelihood and personal safety are also threatened
as he moves to thwart the mob. Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. 1995.
Serpent's Tooth: A Peter Decker/Rene Lazarus Mystery RC 44839
by Faye Kellerman 
read by Richard Davidson
3 cassettes
Thirteen customers are massacred at a chic L.A. restaurant, and
the killer, Harlan Manz, is among the dead. As Lt. Peter Decker
investigates, forensic evidence points to a possible accomplice.
Checking out Manz's previous job as a tennis pro leads Decker to
an heiress with a lot to gain by her parents' deaths. Violence,
strong language, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1997.
Shadow Queen RC 40841
by Tony Gibbs 
read by Jennifer Mendenhall
2 cassettes
An elderly librarian contacts a historical-romance writer,
claiming to have the long-missing Casket Letters supposedly
written by Mary Stuart. The librarian also has a family Bible
that proves her reclusive daughter, Marie, is the rightful heir
of the Scottish queen. While the writer's New York publishing
firm frantically tries to authenticate the letters, an Irish
terrorist plots to make this discovery work for his cause. Strong
language. 1992.
Shinju RC 43369
by Laura Joh Rowland 
read by Robert Sams
3 cassettes
In 1689 Tokyo, detective Sano Ichiro discovers the bodies of a
man and a woman bound together in an apparent shinju or "double
love suicide." But Sano suspects otherwise and risks personal
ruin as he follows a trail of clues that lead to a treasonous
plot against the shogun. Violence. 1994.
Shroud for a Nightingale: An Adam Dalgliesh Mystery RC 43141
by P.D. James 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
2 cassettes
The General Nursing Council inspector is visiting the Nightingale
School on the Sussex-Hampshire border. As she watches the class
practice tube feeding, the nurse playing the patient suddenly
convulses and dies. Soon another nurse is dead. Scotland Yard's
Adam Dalgliesh investigates. 1971.
Silent Witness RC 43767
by Richard North Patterson 
read by Chuck Benson
4 cassettes
When he was a teenager, Tony Lord was falsely accused of
murdering his girlfriend, Alison. Now a successful attorney, Tony
learns his best friend from that time, Sam, is in a similar
situation. Determined to save Sam, Tony returns to his now hated
hometown. Strong language, some violence, and some explicit
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
The Sins of the Wolf: A William Monk Mystery RC 44216
by Anne Perry 
read by James DeLotel
3 cassettes
In Victorian England, nurse Hester Latterly is hired to accompany
Mrs. Farraline on the train to London from Edinburgh and to see
that she takes her medication. But Mrs. Farraline dies on the
trip and Hester faces murder charges. Investigator William Monk
comes to her aid. 1994.
Small Vices RC 44310
by Robert B. Parker 
read by Ray Foushee
2 cassettes
As a district attorney, Rita Fiore won a murder conviction for
convicted sex offender Ellis Alves. Two years later, now as part
of a major law firm, Fiore has doubts about Alves's guilt, and
convinces her firm to hire Spenser to investigate his claims of
innocence. But soon after Spenser begins work, a "man in gray"
takes him down with three shots. Strong language and some
violence. Bestseller 1997.
Smallbone Deceased RC 44345
by Michael Gilbert 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
The elder Horniman-of the firm of Horniman, Birley, and
Craine-has died and his son Bob has just taken his place. Bob is
now co-trustee with a Mr. Smallbone on one of the firm's large
accounts. But when Horniman is unsuccessful in contacting
Smallbone to discuss the account, he opens the deed box himself
and finds Mr. Smallbone's body. 1950.
Smoke RC 43592
by Donald E. Westlake 
read by Bruce Huntey
3 cassettes
Freddie Noon, twenty-nine, is a thief. When he breaks into the
apartment of two doctors doing research for the tobacco industry,
they convince Freddie to sample a drug they are creating. Freddie
becomes invisible! Not such a bad thing for a thief, or is it?
Strong language. 1995.
Strong as Death RC 44347
by Sharan Newman 
read by Suzanne Toren
2 cassettes
In this medieval mystery, a couple journeys to a shrine to pray
for fertility. En route they join a motley group of other
pilgrims, some of whom suffer fatal mishaps. The wife and husband
follow clues leading to an old wrong and a vengeful killer.
Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Sunset Express RC 43514
by Robert Crais 
read by Gregory Gorton
2 cassettes
LAPD detective Angela Rossi says she recovered the murder weapon
from the garden of the victim's husband. But since Rossi was once
accused of planting evidence, Elvis Cole is hired to find holes
in her story. He follows another trail of clues that draws him
deeper into intrigue and danger. Strong language. 1996.
Survival of the Fittest: An Alex Deleware Mystery RC 45156
by Jonathan Kellerman 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
3 cassettes
LAPD detective Milo Sturgis asks psychologist Alex Delaware to
help solve the murder of a deaf Israeli teenager. After two other
people with physical disabilities are killed, Delaware goes
undercover to work on the case. Israeli policeman Daniel Sharavi,
at the request of the teen's father, joins the team. Some
violence and some strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Ten-lb. Penalty RC 44861
by Dick Francis 
read by Christopher Walker
2 cassettes
Eighteen-year-old Ben Juliard abandons his dream of becoming a
professional jockey when he is falsely accused of drug abuse.
After Ben joins the staff of his politically ambitious father,
whose enemies aim to derail his promising career, the pair join
forces in opposing the 
scandal-mongers. Bestseller 1997.
The Tenth Justice RC 44527
by Brad Meltzer 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes
Ben Addison, a Supreme Court clerk, unwittingly leaks the outcome
of a forthcoming Court decision and finds himself the target of
blackmail. Worse, Ben and his intimate circle of friends begin to
treat each other with suspicion when someone in their group
appears to be leaking information to the blackmailer. Some strong
language. 1997.
Three at Wolfe's Door RC 45314
by Rex Stout 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
Three tales of mystery featuring Nero Wolfe and Archie Goodwin.
In "Poison a la Carte," Wolfe lends out his cook, and some of the
dinner guests die. In "Method Three for Murder," a woman arrives
at Wolfe's office driving a cab with a corpse inside. And in "The
Rodeo Murder," a rodeo rider's rope turns up on the chest of a
dead man. 1960.
Three Doors to Death RC 45281
by Rex Stout 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
Three mysteries written between 1947 and 1949. In "Man Alive,"
Nero Wolfe's investigation of the murder of a man already
declared dead takes him into the world of high fashion. "Omit
Flowers" involves the food industry and a family's covering up
for a murderer. In "Door to Death," a horticulturist finds his
fiancée dead in his hothouse. Some strong language. 1995.
Three to Get Deadly RC 44434
by Janet Evanovich 
read by Dani Carr
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Two for the Dough 
(RC 42474), bounty hunter Stephanie Plum is dismayed to be
assigned to pick up a neighborhood favorite, candy store owner Mo
Bedemier. Mo was arrested for "carrying concealed." Although this
crime is common in Trenton, Mo has gone into hiding. Strong
language, some violence, and some descriptions of sex. 1997.
Traitors Gate: A Thomas and Charlotte Pitt Mystery RC 43771
by Anne Perry 
read by Terry Hayes Sales
3 cassettes
Thomas Pitt, now promoted to superintendent, is at home when his
long-time friend Matthew Desmond comes to call. Desmond's father
has died from an overdose of laudanum, and Desmond suspects foul
play. So does Pitt when he learns that Sir Arthur Desmond was a
member of the covert Inner Circle. Pitt, with the help of his
wife, Charlotte, begins an investigation that uncovers betrayal
in the Colonial Office and a second murder. 1995.
Trunk Music RC 44802
by Michael Connelly 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
3 cassettes
When a mob-connected Hollywood film producer is murdered,
detective Harry Bosch begins his crime hunt in Las Vegas. Along
the trail, Bosch deals with an old flame, seedy cops, and the
sordid underworld. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of
sex. Bestseller 1997.
The Turquoise Mask RC 44086
by Phyllis A. Whitney 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Amanda Austin comes to Santa Fe to learn the truth about her
mother, who died mysteriously when Amanda was only five, and to
face the fiery Spanish blood of her ancestors, the Cordovas.
1974.
Uncle Silas: A Tale of Bartram-Haugh  RC 44497
by J.S. Le Fanu 
read by Barbara Caruso
4 cassettes (Reissue)
Maud Ruthyn, the heroine of this classic Victorian novel, recalls
her fear of death, her moody father, the grotesque Madame de la
Rougierre, and the suspicions surrounding her Uncle Silas. New
introduction by Frederick Shroyer. 1966.
Underdog RC 43092
by Laurien Berenson 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
2 cassettes
Melanie Travis is presented with a pedigreed poodle and enrolls
the pup in Jenny Maguire's elite dog handling school. When Jenny
loses her own dog, Ziggy, Melanie offers consolation. But Jenny
herself is dead within a week, and Melanie discovers Ziggy alive.
The sleuth hits the dog show circuit on a hunt for Jenny's
killer. 1996.
The Unknown Quantity RC 44376
by Mignon G. Eberhart 
read by Nanette Savard
2 cassettes
Sarah doesn't know why she let Arthur, her husband, talk her into
the deception. He said he needed to go away secretly, and that
James Dixon-who looks exactly like him-would stay with her and
act as his double. It all becomes a nightmare when a body is
discovered in the lake and Sarah is accused of her husband's
murder. 1953.
The Venus Throw RC 43363
by Steven Saylor 
read by Richard Davidson
3 cassettes
In this sequel to Catilina's Riddle 
(RC 39565), Gordianus the Finder is visited by his old teacher,
Dio, who is now Egyptian ambassador to Rome and who fears
assassination. Dio is killed that very night, and Gordianus
becomes enmeshed in a contentious trial involving political
conspiracy and public scandal. Strong language. 1995.
Watery Grave RC 44124
by Bruce Alexander 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
In 1767 Josiah Markham, captain of a British frigate, falls
overboard and drowns in the Indian Ocean. When the ship returns
to England, the acting captain accuses another officer of
murdering Markham. Blind magistrate Sir John Fielding probes the
matter. 1996.
Where Echoes Live: A Sharon McCone Mystery RC 42869
by Marcia Muller 
read by Pam Ward
2 cassettes
Sharon McCone has joined a former colleague in the California
desert to work for the California Coalition for Environmental
Preservation. A San Francisco-Hong Kong-based company is buying
up nearby acreage, disturbing the environment, and making
suspicious land deals with the few remaining residents. McCone
investigates the disappearance of a local eccentric and the
appearance of a bullet-ridden body. Strong language and some
violence. 1991.
Winter Games RC 44128
by John Feinstein 
read by Christopher Hurt
2 cassettes
Rytis Buzelis, a Lithuanian-born basketball star, is wooed by
college coaches across the country. When journalist Bobby
Kelleher finds the body of an old friend and coach who had been
vying to sign Buzelis, Kelleher ventures into the sinister world
of big-money sports to find the killer. Strong language. 1995.
With Child RC 44894
by Laurie R. King 
read by Kimberly Schraf
2 cassettes
San Francisco detective Kate Martinelli is reeling from being
left by her girlfriend, when Jules, the twelve-year-old daughter
of her work partner's fiancée, asks for help. After assisting
her, Kate inadvertently puts Jules in the path of a serial
killer, and Jules disappears. Strong language and some violence.
1996.
The Wood Beyond RC 43624
by Reginald Hill 
read by George Holmes
3 cassettes
While picketing a drug-research lab, 
animal-rights demonstrators stumble upon a generations-old
corpse. In the course of the investigation, Inspector Peter
Pascoe links the unearthed remains to his grandfather's shameful
court martial in World War I. Strong language. 1996.
Written in Blood: A Chief Inspector Barnaby Mystery RC 43927
by Caroline Graham 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
3 cassettes
The eccentrics in a writers' group are pleased to get author Max
Jennings as a guest speaker-except for the reclusive host, who
begs not to be left alone with him. As everyone is leaving,
Jennings rushes back inside and bars the door. Strong language
and some descriptions 
of sex. 1995.
Yesterday's News RC 44116
by Jeremiah Healy 
read by Nick Sullivan
2 cassettes
Newspaperwoman Jane Rust hires Boston private eye John Cuddy to
investigate the murder of one of her informants. The next night
Jane's body is found in her apartment. Her death is considered a
suicide and soon becomes "yesterday's news." But Cuddy is
convinced there is more to it. Strong language and descriptions
of sex. 1989.
Occult and Horror
The Between RC 43640
by Tananarive Due 
read by L.J. Ganser
2 cassettes
As a child, Hilton James was rescued from drowning by his
grandmother, who perished to save him. Now a family man of almost
forty, he begins to think his borrowed time is running out.
Haunted by dreams of death and threatened by a psychotic who
stalks his family, Hilton finds his grip on reality slipping.
Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Dance of Death RC 43224
by P.N. Elrod 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Death Masque 
(RC 43223), Jonathan Barrett has grown used to his abilities and
needs as a vampire. Now he finds a most engaging four-year-old
boy who is his image-and his own son. When his enemies try to use
his affection for the lad against him, Jonathan invokes his
immortal powers. Descriptions of sex. 1996.
Dark Debts RC 44619
by Karen Hall 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
A dark debt, or curse, hangs over the entire Landry family. Cam
Landry has just signed a major publishing contract when he goes
berserk. His former lover, trying to understand what happened,
discovers other family members who believe insanity awaits them.
And an ex-Jesuit priest, writing an article on exorcism,
discovers he is related to the Landrys. Strong language,
violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Death and the Maiden RC 43222
by P.N. Elrod 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
Set just before the Revolutionary War, this sequel to Red Death
(RC 43221) finds British colonist Jonathan Barrett trying to live
a normal life with his family as he adjusts to his vampire needs
and abilities. When the growing tensions of the coming conflict
threaten his sanctuary and loved ones, Jonathan is forced to call
up the powers of the undead. 1994.
Death Masque RC 43223
by P.N. Elrod 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Death and the Maiden (RC 43222) set in 1777,
vampire Jonathan Barrett resides in Long Island where he
struggles with his "changed condition." Desperate to be with his
lover, Nora, he leaves for England with his sister and valet.
There Jonathan becomes embroiled in London society while
searching for Nora. Descriptions of sex and some strong language.
1995.
Desperation RC 43098
by Stephen King 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
4 cassettes
A couple driving across the Nevada desert are pulled over by an
enormous cop, who arrests them for marijuana that mysteriously
appears in their trunk. On the way back to the town, Desperation,
they realize the cop is insane. Violence, strong language, and
some explicit descriptions of sex. Companion to The Regulators
(RC 42876), written under the name of Richard Bachman. Bestseller
1996.
Red Death RC 43221
by P.N. Elrod 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
In pre-Revolutionary War America, Jonathan Barrett's mad loyalist
mother ships him off to England's Cambridge University. There
Jonathan meets Nora Jones, who enjoys drinking blood during
lovemaking. Later when he is killed while defending the Tory
cause, he rises as a vampire. Prequel to Death and the Maiden (RC
43222). Some strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1993.
The Secret Life of Laszlo, Count Dracula  RC 43169
by Roderick Anscombe 
read by Jamie Horton
3 cassettes
A psychiatrist offers this fictional diary recounting a man's
reluctant, horrified surrender to perversion. Though not a real
vampire, this Dracula gradually develops a taste for the blood of
young girls, even as he tries to live a respectable life.
Violence and descriptions of sex. 1994.
Short Circuits: Thirteen Shocking Stories by Outstanding Writers
for Young Adults  RC 43261
edited by Donald R. Gallo 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Tales of terror about teenagers caught 
in precarious situations. In "Ethan Unbound," a boy finds himself
locked in the library with a librarian-witch and must summon
Dracula and other literary figures to his aid. For junior and
senior high readers. 1992.
Son of Rosemary: The Sequel to Rosemary's Baby RC 44999
by Ira Levin 
read by David Palmer
2 cassettes
In 1999 when Rosemary wakes from a twenty-seven-year coma, her
first concern is her son Andy. Now thirty-three years old, he is
a spiritual leader with a worldwide following. But he was raised
by the witches' coven, so Rosemary wonders how truthful Andy is.
Sequel to Rosemary's Baby (RC 17695). Some strong language.
Bestseller 1997.
Political Themes
Bullet Heart RC 43393
by Michael Doane 
read by Rick Rohan
3 cassettes
When golf course developers in South Dakota unearth a pioneer
burial ground in 1972, they reinter the bones of the white
settlers, but keep those of an Indian girl for public display as
"artifacts." After failed attempts to recover the bones, the
Indians resort to force, leading to a shootout with FBI agents.
Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1994.
Don't Die before You're Dead  
RC 43643
by Yevgeny Yevtushenko 
read by Ken Kliban
3 cassettes
A fictionalized chronicle of the three-day attempted coup in the
Soviet Union in 1991. Depicts citizens struggling for freedom yet
still insecure from their long subjugation to Communism. Blends
autobi- ography, political suspense, and love stories to
dramatize the historic event. Strong language. 1995.
1876 RC 44566
by Gore Vidal 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes (Reissue)
Sequel to Burr (RC 44097) that evokes the New York and Washington
of 1876 and deals with the contested presidential election
between Samuel Tilden and Rutherford B. Hayes. Burr's
unacknowledged son returns from Paris to write about the U.S.
political scene, seek financial security for himself, and find a
good marriage for his titled widowed daughter. 1976.
Executive Orders RC 43316
by Tom Clancy 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
9 cassettes
In this sequel to Debt of Honor 
(RC 38875), Jack Ryan accedes to the presidency following a
massive terrorist attack on the Capitol. Amid the devastation and
turmoil, Ryan endeavors to restore a functioning government even
as foreign and domestic forces move to exploit the crisis for
their own ends. Strong language and violence. Bestseller 1996.
The Illuminati RC 43186
by Larry Burkett 
read by Jack Fox
3 cassettes
In the year 2001, the president suspends the U.S. Congress
because of a crumbling economy. His act follows the agenda of the
Illuminati, a secret society that aims to make a one-world
economy controlled by a central computer system. An Atlanta
pastor leads a crusade to expose the society and thwart the
diabolical scheme. 1991.
Kowloon Tong RC 44859
by Paul Theroux 
read by Anne Flosnik
2 cassettes
In 1996 Hong Kong prepares to return to Chinese rule the next
year. But middle-aged Neville Mullard and his mother cling to
their British lifestyle. When a Chinese businessman offers to buy
out their family's textile factory, mother and son are at odds
until a tragedy causes them to realize the peril of their
situation. Violence. Bestseller 1997.
The Ladies' Lunch RC 39939
by Patricia O'Brien 
read by Gillian Wilson
3 cassettes
Four Washington women (a Supreme Court nominee, a prestigious
caterer, a journalist, and a congresswoman) are waiting for White
House press secretary Faith Paige to join them for their regular
lunch when they learn she was found dead in the Potomac. As the
women try to determine why and if their friend committed suicide,
they are thwarted by White House insiders and their lives are
thrown into turmoil. Some strong language. 1994.
The Patchwork People RC 43217
by Louise Lawrence 
read by Vanessa Maroney
2 cassettes
In twenty-first century, the natural resources of Wales are
almost depleted, and work is scarce. As Hugh, sixteen, panhandles
at the railway station, he meets and rescues Helena, fifteen, the
rich daughter of a mine manager. They come to realize that they
have the ability to reshape their futures. Some strong language.
For senior high readers. 1994.
The People's Choice RC 42310
by Jeff Greenfield 
read by Ray Foushee
2 cassettes
When the president-elect dies in a freak accident just two days
after his election, many fear that the departed's dim-witted
running mate will accede to the top post. Constitutional chaos
ensues as the electoral college process unfolds and insiders vie
to influence the outcome. Political wit and satire abound. 1995.
The Plan RC 43561
by Stephen J. Cannell 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes
A Mafia capo feels threatened by the new anticrime laws and
decides to put his own puppet in the White House to change the
odds. The plan is discovered by Ryan Bolt, who is hired to do a
documentary on the sham candidate. Bolt finds himself in a
ruthless power game and must fight to save himself and his
country. Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Shadow of a Hero RC 43618
by Peter Dickinson 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
With the rise of ethnic nationalism in postcommunist Eastern
Europe, English-born Letta and her grandfather, Restaur Vax,
return to his native Varina, a fictional Balkan state. But
officials there fear that Vax, the nation's last democratic
leader, might spur Varian nationalism, and his family is plunged
into perilous intrigue. For junior and senior high readers. 1994.
Summit RC 44517
by D.M. Thomas 
read by John Horton
1 cassette
An adult fairy tale intended as a satirical coda to Ararat (RC
19387), Swallow 
(RC 38668), and Sphinx (RC 44511). A summit conference is the
setting for a meeting between the Soviet premier and an ailing
actor who has become president of the United States. Strong
language and descriptions of sex. 1987.
The Thor Conspiracy: The Seventy-Hour Countdown to Disaster RC
43187
by Larry Burkett 
read by Jack Fox
2 cassettes
In this sequel to The Illuminati 
(RC 43186), set in the near future, the U.S. government is
controlled by environmentalists. When documents are found to
indicate a political cover-up in the THOR nuclear testing
project, three patriots combine their talents to thwart the
corrupt regime. 1995.
The Two Georges RC 43256
by Richard Dreyfuss and 
Harry Turtledove 
read by Roy Avers
4 cassettes
In this "alternate history" tale, 1996 America is at peace under
His Majesty Charles III-a peace that has held since the 1760s,
when George Washington and George III struck an agreement. When
the symbol of harmony, a painting called The Two Georges, is
stolen by a separatist group, a team of sleuths sets out to get
it back. Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Waiting for the Dark, Waiting for the Light RC 44328
by Ivan Klima 
read by Christopher Hurt
2 cassettes
Ambitious filmmaker Pavel Fuka yearns to make a documentary
exposing the oppression and corruption endemic to Communist
Czechoslovakia. But when Communism falls, Fuka discovers internal
obstacles impede his completion of his great work: cynicism,
apathy, and a sense of futility brought on by years of cultural
conditioning. Some strong language. 1994.
Psychological Themes
Guided Tours of Hell RC 44270
by Francine Prose 
read by Laura Giannarelli
2 cassettes
Two novellas about traveling Americans who are transformed as
they confront the historic tragedies of the French Revolution and
the Holocaust. In the title story, a second-rate writer dreams of
Kafka while touring a concentration camp. In "Three Pigs in Five
Days," a travel writer seeks to rekindle a waning romance with
her editor while on a "death tour" of Paris. Strong language.
Bestseller 1997.
Konfidenz RC 43371
by Ariel Dorfman 
read by Terence Aselford
1 cassette
A woman comes to Paris to aid her imperiled lover. Immediately,
the telephone rings and she is swept into an alarming
relationship with the mysterious voice of a man who seems to know
everything about her, even intimate details. Gradually there
comes a startling revelation. Strong language and descriptions of
sex. 1995.
Missing Pieces RC 44834
by Joy Fielding 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
2 cassettes
Kate Sinclair, a family therapist, is having trouble with her own
family. Her teenage daughter is running wild, her mother has
Alzheimer's disease, and her half-sister JoLynn marries Colin
Friendly, a serial killer convicted of murdering thirteen women.
Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex.
1997.
My Other Life RC 43635
by Paul Theroux 
read by John Stratton
4 cassettes
The author's "story of a life I could have lived had things been
different." His imaginary memoir includes stints as teacher at an
African leper colony and as writer in Singapore and London. He
relates a series of encounters with eccentrics and seductive
women. Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Queen of the Tambourine 
RC 43172
by Jane Gardam 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
The chronicle of stodgy suburban housewife Eliza Peabody's mental
breakdown as reflected through letters that she writes to a
neighbor. When one of the missives incites the neighbor to
abandon her family, Eliza cracks. Later epistles trace her
continuing collapse. 1991.
Religious Themes
Other books with religious themes can be found in categories such
as family, historical, romance, and westerns.
Ariel Custer RC 39998
by Grace Livingston Hill 
read by Sharon Lauve Komorn
2 cassettes
When her grandmother dies, Ariel Custer of Virginia must face the
world alone with God. She travels north to a promised job as a
librarian's apprentice but finds the job has been filled. Ariel
is rescued by Jud Granniss, who helps her get settled. Although
Jud is drawn to gentle Ariel, his harsh overbearing mother
strongly disapproves, wanting Jud to marry a popular girl
instead. 1929.
Blind Faith RC 45291
by Judith Pella 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
Irene Lorenzo's faith has been tested as a result of her divorce
from Greg Mitchell. Now Joel Costain, a blind lawyer, has
approached Irene seeking information about Greg, who claimed to
be Joel's brother and has now died under mysterious
circumstances. As the two search for answers, Irene begins to
regain her faith. 1996.
Coming through the Rye RC 39964
by Grace Livingston Hill 
read by Ellen Frost
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Romayne Ransom is thrilled when her widowed father is finally
able to afford some nice things for the family. But one day she
comes home to find members of a league staked out in her house
waiting to arrest her father and brother for selling liquor.
Young attorney Evan Sherwood, head of the league, feels sorry for
Romayne, who knew nothing of the activity. But she holds him
responsible for ruining her family. 1926.
The End of the Age RC 43093
by Pat Robertson 
read by Andy Chappell
3 cassettes
The apocalyptic prophesy is fulfilled in this tale of the Earth's
last days in the year 2000. In the wake of natural calamities,
the Antichrist forms a new world order based in Babylon. All are
doomed but the "unaffected," who believe in Jesus Christ and who
finally prevail. 1995.
Happiness Hill RC 43415
by Grace Livingston Hill 
read by Suzanne Toren
2 cassettes
Jane Arleth is taking a much-needed vacation and one that her
family has encouraged. Jane is having a wonderful time and has
met a nice man. Then, with one week left, she suddenly finds
herself headed home after getting a letter from her younger
sister. Jane's world at home is in trouble. 1932.
In Heaven as on Earth: A Vision of the Afterlife RC 43744
by M. Scott Peck 
read by Gregory Gorton
1 cassette
The tale of a man's journey into the afterlife. Upon dying, he
finds himself in a small room where "greeters" introduce him to
his new life. He is reunited with departed loved ones and has an
encounter with Satan in the form of an enticing young woman.
Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Scarlet Thread RC 44425
by Francine Rivers 
read by Barbara Pinolini
3 cassettes
California housewife Sierra Clanton Madrid learns she has much in
common with her pioneer ancestor, Mary Kathryn McMurray, as she
reads Mary's tattered journal. Like her predecessor, Sierra is
forced to move away from family and friends so her husband can
make a new beginning. Both women struggle, but each finds
contentment when she turns to God. 1996.
The Strange Proposal RC 40954
by Grace Livingston Hill 
read by Jeanne Evans
2 cassettes (Reissue)
John Saxon takes time off from his medical studies to be best man
for Jeff Wainwright's wedding. During the ceremony, John falls in
love at first sight with the maid of honor, whom he has been told
is Helen Foster, a good Christian woman. He blurts out a proposal
to her before leaving. Once on the train, John looks at the card
she gave him and realizes there had been a substitution: the girl
he fell for is Jeff's cousin, heiress Mary Elizabeth Wainwright.
1935.
Yesterday Framed in Today RC 40936
by Isabella Macdonald Alden 
read by June Carter
2 cassettes
David Holman, nearing his thirtieth birthday, has spent the past
seven years in bed -the result of his own recklessness. But now
there is hope. A stranger able to heal the sick has come to town,
and David is determined to see him. As David hopes for a miracle,
he wonders if he will once again be disappointed by the work of a
physician. 1898.
Romance
Absolutely, Positively RC 44426
by Jayne Ann Krentz 
read by Nanette Savard
2 cassettes
Molly Abberwick, sole trustee of a foundation that supports
inventors, hires Harry Trevelyan as a consultant. Molly is on the
verge of firing him when he shocks her by suggesting they have an
affair. Considering her options, she finds that Harry is not as
unreasonable as he appears. Some strong language and some
explicit descriptions of sex. 1996.
Acts of Love RC 44307
by Judith Michael 
read by Barbara Pinolini
3 cassettes
As theater director Lucas Cameron is closing his grandmother's
villa in Italy, he comes across a box of letters from her
protégé, Jessica Fontaine. Jessica and his grandmother were great
actresses, but now his grandmother is dead, and Jessica has not
been seen on stage for years. Although Lucas never liked Jessica,
something about her letters compels him to seek her out. Some
strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Affair RC 44803
by Amanda Quick 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
As the sole support of her younger sister and herself, Charlotte
Arkendale has established a business of making discreet inquiries
about the suitors of wealthy young women. With her new man of
affairs, she is looking into the death of one of her recent
clients when it soon becomes evident that she and her assistant
are being stalked by a killer. Bestseller 1997.
All I Need Is You RC 45468
by Johanna Lindsey 
read by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
Casey Straton, seventeen, believes she can run her grandfather's
Texas ranch, but her father does not. So Casey, dressed as a boy,
runs away to prove herself. New Yorker Damian Rutledge III has
come west to find his father's killer. When Damian and Casey
meet, he hires her to help with the search, not suspecting she is
a woman. Strong language and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller
1997.
All the Winters That Have Been  
RC 43884
by Evan Maxwell 
read by Jeff Baker
1 cassette
Dane Corvin returns to the Pacific Northwest to tend his dying
uncle and to resolve the rift that separated him from his lover,
Helen Raven, twenty years ago. In a bittersweet reunion, Helen
reveals that Dane is the father of her son. Strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1995.
Anything for Love RC 42575
by Janelle Taylor 
read by Ann Hodapp
2 cassettes
Rachel Gaines has been a widow for fifteen years and, at
forty-seven, is tired of doing charity work and attending ladies'
luncheons. Her chance for a change of pace comes at a class
reunion. There she again meets Quentin Rawls, whom she cut out of
her life more than twelve years earlier. Some explicit
descriptions of sex. 1995.
Arrow to the Heart RC 43926
by Jennifer Blake 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Giles Castlereagh knows he is dying and wants to be sure he has
an heir to inherit Arcadia, his Louisiana plantation, but Katrine
is still a virgin because their marriage remains unconsummated.
Giles has arranged a tournament to pick a suitable mate for
Katrine. But when Rowan de Blanc wins the honor, neither he nor
Katrine are willing to obey Giles's orders, until they are locked
in the tower together. Some strong language and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1993.
Autumn Lover RC 43798
by Elizabeth Lowell 
read by Sharon Murray
3 cassettes
Elyssa Sutton, twenty, is startled when Hunter Maxwell offers his
services as a ramrod who can handle a gun. Together they rally
against the Culpeppers, a family of raiders who are stripping the
Ladder S ranch of cattle. Strong language, explicit descriptions
of sex, and some violence. Bestseller 1996.
Beauty's Release RC 41076
by A.N. Roquelaure 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
Anne Rice, writing as A.N. Roquelaure, concludes her trilogy the
Erotic Adventures of Sleeping Beauty. Beauty and her beloved, the
slave Tristan, have been taken captive by a sultan, who imprisons
her in his harem. Sequel to Beauty's Punishment (RC 40644).
Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex.
1985.
The Best Revenge RC 45147
by Stella Cameron 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
Rae Faith flees her abusive childhood home and, for ten years,
leads a decent life, marrying a salesman. Then one day her
husband doesn't return home, and his brother-in-law, Dallas
Calhoun, accuses them both of embezzlement. Hoping to clear her
own name, Rae follows Dallas -and falls in love. Violence, strong
language, and explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1998.
Bridge of Dreams RC 44830
by Christina Skye 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
Two hundred years after Gabriel Ashton died at Draycott Abbey,
his body and will have been discovered, and Nicholas Draycott
must handle the distribution of a case of wine. But Cathlin
O'Neill, whose mother also died at Draycott Abbey, is reluctant
to fulfill the terms of the will. Sequel to Hour of the Rose (RC
41752). Some strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1995.
Captive Bride RC 44168
by Johanna Lindsey 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
Seventeen-year-old Christina Wakefield's first London season in
1883 is ruined by the arrogant Philip Caxton. Soon afterwards her
brother is ordered to Cairo, and Christina travels with him. On
her first night there, Christina is abducted by Sheik Abu, a.k.a.
Philip Caxton. Explicit descriptions of sex, some strong
language, and some violence. 1977.
The Carousel RC 41818
by Rosamunde Pilcher 
read by Mimi Bederman
1 cassette
A contemporary romance set in a seaside town in Cornwall. While
visiting a beloved aunt, Prue falls in love with the most
interesting man she's ever met, an unpredictable artist named
Daniel who sowed considerable wild oats in his youth. Prue also
forms an attachment to a poor little rich girl who, she learns to
her astonishment, is one of Daniel's offspring. 1982.
Chances Are RC 45074
by Robin Lee Hatcher 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
In 1886, actress Faith Butler must quit her job with a traveling
troupe and stay in the small town of Dead Horse, Wyoming, until
her ill daughter recovers. Reclusive rancher Drake Rutledge
reluctantly hires Faith as a housekeeper even though he has
avoided women since an accident that cost him an eye. Some strong
language, some violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex.
1996.
Christmas Belles RC 44945
by Susan Carroll 
read by Ann Hodapp
1 cassette
On Christmas Eve 1805, Sir Waverly died en route to Portugal
while on a diplomatic mission. Now two years later, Captain
William Trent, guardian of Waverly's four daughters, has come to
Windhaven Manor in Norfolk to take over the estate he inher- ited
and to marry the eldest sister. But as his wedding day
approaches, Trent realizes he is marrying the wrong woman. 1992.
Christmas Carol RC 39966
by Flora Speer 
read by Anne Mullen
2 cassettes
After her bankrupt father kills himself, a bitter Carol takes a
job in London as a paid companion to miserly Lady Augusta. When
Augusta dies five years later at Christmas, her ghost appears and
explains to Carol that for penance she is to make sure Carol
doesn't waste her life, too. Augusta and Carol experience a past,
present, and future Christmas, and Carol falls in love each time,
with the same man. Explicit descriptions of sex and some strong
language. 1994.
The Clayborne Brides: One Pink Rose, One White Rose, One Red Rose 
RC 45329
by Julie Garwood 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
3 cassettes
This companion to For the Roses 
(RC 43563) portrays events leading up to the marriages of three
Clayborne brothers. Travis falls for a woman he is escorting to
meet her mail-order bridegroom, Douglas falls in love with a
woman for whom he acts as a midwife, and Adam falls for the woman
Mama Rose picked out for him. Some descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
Dancing at the Harvest Moon 
RC 45163
by K.C. McKinnon 
read by Pam Ward
1 cassette
A recently divorced English professor, Maggie, impulsively
decides to revisit the summer resort where she met her first
love. There, her passion is rekindled by the son of her former
lover. She debates whether to let her heart or her mind determine
her future. Some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Deep Waters RC 44530
by Jayne Ann Krentz 
read by Ann Hodapp
2 cassettes
Charity Truitt, twenty-nine, walks out on her engagement party
and escapes to Whispering Waters Cove, Washington. Although their
marriage meant a merger between two large Seattle firms, her
fiancé was just too big a man for Charity. In her new life,
Charity meets Elias Winters, a man who seems to be just the right
size. Some strong language and some explicit descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1996.
The Dream Hunter RC 41791
by Laura Kinsale 
read by Laura Giannarelli
3 cassettes
Lord Arden Winter once again leaves London for the desert, this
time in disguise to procure a noted horse. He learns too late
that the young Bedouin boy he meets up with is actually Zenia,
the illegitimate daughter of his late friend, an Englishwoman who
lived among the Arabs. As they await their execution, Arden and
Zenia make love. Zenia, pregnant, escapes to London, believing
Arden dead. Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions
of sex. 1994.
Dream Man RC 43933
by Linda Howard 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
Six years after a brutal incident, Marlie Keen is hopeful that
her psychic abilities are gone for good. Then she is overcome
with the knowledge that a man is committing a savage murder.
Police detective Dane Hollister doesn't believe her until he
investigates her past. But he does know he's wildly attracted to
her from the start-even while he considers her a suspect. Strong
language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller
1994.
Fancy Lady RC 44229
by Peggy Hanchar 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Coop Fletcher, a successful Colorado businessman, feels his
Indian blood is keeping him from being accepted into society. He
asks his attorney to find a real lady to marry him and help his
reputation. Down-on-her-luck actress Fancy Bourne arrives,
pretending to be a plantation owner's daughter. Some violence and
some explicit descriptions of sex. 1994.
Far from Home RC 44947
by Georgia Bockoven 
read by Jill Fox
2 cassettes
Adam Kirkpatric is fishing near his California town when he sees
a woman jump off a cliff into the sea. Rescuing her, Adam finds
himself drawn to this mysterious Miranda Dolan. Although he
finally wins her trust, Miranda refuses to discuss her
nightmarish past. Strong language, violence, and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1996.
Fire: A Novel of Hawaii RC 43579
by Armine Von Tempski 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
In 1927 a girl visits her uncle in Hawaii. Though betrothed to a
proper young man in Washington, D.C., she is taken with a dashing
Hawaiian cowboy, whom she later marries. Caught between cultures,
the two cope with adversity, but their love holds fast. Companion
to Hula: A Romance of Hawaii (RC 30708). 1929.
The Folly: Being the Fourth Volume of the Daughters of Mannerling
RC 44591
by Marion Chesney 
read by Jill Ferris
1 cassette
Rachel Beverley, the next sister in line to try to regain the
lost family home, Mannerling, hopes to make a good impression on
the latest owner, Charles Blackwood. But Rachel gets off to a bad
start when she reprimands him for leaving his children in the
charge of a spiteful governess. Sequel to The Deception (RC
42439). 1996.
For the Roses RC 43563
by Julie Garwood 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
4 cassettes
Teenagers Adam, Douglas, Cole, and Travis are struggling to
survive in the alleys of New York City in the 1860s when they
discover an abandoned baby girl. Believing she would never
survive in an orphanage, the boys decide to keep her, and name
her Mary Rose. They become a "family," head west to Montana, and
take up ranching. Then Lord Harrison MacDonald comes looking for
a long-lost Lady Victoria. Some explicit descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1995.
Hawk O'Toole's Hostage RC 44863
by Sandra Brown 
read by Annie Wauters
1 cassette
Hawk O'Toole is convinced that by kidnapping six-year-old Scott,
the son of Representative Price, he can negotiate the reopening
of the Lone Puma silver mine. But he didn't plan to end up with
Miranda, Scott's mother, who is determined to protect her son.
Nor did Hawk expect to fall for his unwanted captive. Some
explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1988.
The Heiress RC 44289
by Jude Deveraux 
read by Anne Flosnik
2 cassettes
In 1572 English knight Jamie Montgomery is assigned to escort the
Maidenhall heiress, who is joining her fiancé. Because Jamie's
family is now impoverished, his sisters convince Jamie to try to
make the heiress fall in love with him. When Jamie mistakes the
heiress's cousin for her and confides his plan to the heiress,
she decides not to reveal her identity. Explicit descriptions of
sex and some strong language. Bestseller 1995.
Holding the Dream RC 44156
by Nora Roberts 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Daring to Dream 
(RC 42829), accountant Kate Powell is stunned to be accused of
skimming money from her clients. Suspended and working in the
shop she co-owns with her cousin and friend, Kate's anxiety leads
to illness. Her unlikely savior is suave Byron De Witt, a manager
in Kate's uncle's hotel chain. Strong language and explicit
descriptions of sex. 1997.
Hunter's Moon RC 43887
by Karen Robards 
read by Ilona Dulaski
2 cassettes
FBI agent Will Lyman stakes out a Kentucky stable to prove
suspected race-fixing. When groom Molly Ballard takes money left
as bait and Lyman's source kills himself, Lyman insists Molly go
undercover for him, and he poses as her boyfriend. Strong
language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1996.
Imagine Love RC 44666
by Katherine Stone 
read by Sharon Murray
4 cassettes
Cole and Claire are singing partners who dream of a life
together, but the brutal death of Cole's father drives Cole away.
When Cole-now famous-returns home twelve years later, he finds he
still cares for Claire and invites her to London. There they
become involved in a bizarre murder plot involving Claire's
former pen pal. Strong language. 1996.
Jackson's Dilemma RC 43352
by Iris Murdoch 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes
On the eve of their wedding, Marian Berran mysteriously jilts
country squire Edward Lannion. The disappointed friends and
family, all overcome with sadness, are healed by a world-wise
manservant, who intervenes and sets their world to rights. 1995.
Kill and Tell RC 45340
by Linda Howard 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
2 cassettes
Shortly after her mother's death, nurse Karen Whitlaw receives a
notebook from her father, a Vietnam vet who abandoned her years
before. She then learns from New Orleans detective Marc Chastain
that her father has been killed. As Karen and Marc become
involved, someone threatens Karen's life. Violence, strong
language, and explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1998.
The Lady in Green RC 44237
by Barbara Metzger 
read by Sharon Murray
2 cassettes
Young heiress Annalise Avery, just recovered from a brain fever,
overhears her fiancé joking with her stepfather about his other
women. Outraged that her greedy guardian insists the wedding
still take place, Annalise flees with her former nanny and her
nanny's rascal husband to her aunt's home. When they discover her
traveling aunt is renting the house out, the trio pose as
servants, but find that the tenant is a blatant womanizer. Some
strong language. 1993.
Legend RC 43560
by Jude Deveraux 
read by Ann Hodapp
3 cassettes
Shortly before she is to marry, Kady Long impulsively buys an old
flour tin. Inside it she discovers a well-preserved satin wedding
dress, just the kind she's been looking for. She tries it on and
suddenly finds herself transported in time to a harsh landscape
where a man is about to be hanged. Descriptions of sex and some
strong language. Bestseller 1996.
The Listening Sky RC 44223
by Dorothy Garlock 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
3 cassettes
Jane Love answers an ad for female workers in Timbertown, Wyoming
Territory, but soon realizes the ad was a ploy by mill owner T.C.
Kilkenny to lure single women to town to marry his lumberjacks.
This, coupled with threats to reveal a dark secret, makes Jane
want to leave, until Kilkenny convinces her otherwise. Strong
language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Lonely Lady RC 44451
by Harold Robbins 
read by Barbara Pinolini
3 cassettes (Reissue)
Relates the life of JeriLee Randall, a small-town girl, from
child to woman and from actress to bestselling author. An early
marriage to a brilliant older playwright fails, but JeriLee finds
success through perseverance and determination. Strong language
and explicit descriptions of sex. 1976.
The Long Road Home RC 46008
by Danielle Steel 
read by Annie Wauters
3 cassettes
Gabriella Harrison, the only child of wealthy New Yorkers, is
abused by her deranged mother for more than ten years. Abandoned
by her now-divorced parents at a convent, Gabriella is content
until she falls in love with a priest. Some violence and some
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1998.
Lost Island RC 44220
by Phyllis A. Whitney 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Lacey Ames returns to Hampton, an island off the coast of
Georgia, where she spent her childhood and where her youthful
romance with Giles Severn ended in disappointment. Unable to
forget Giles, Lacey hopes to exorcise the spell of the island and
of Giles. 1970.
Love Me Forever RC 43432
by Johanna Lindsey 
read by Jill Ferris
2 cassettes
Nineteenth-century English heiress Kimberly Richards is pressured
to select a husband soon so her father can remarry. Lachlan
MacGregor is in need of a wife with money, since his stepmother
took 
off with his family's inheritance. Then Richards and MacGregor
are given adjoining rooms while visiting a mutual friend. Some
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1995.
The MacGregor Brides RC 45023
by Nora Roberts 
read by Ilona Dulaski
2 cassettes
Daniel MacGregor, ninety years old, meddles in the love lives of
his three oldest granddaughters. Impatient for
great-grandchildren, MacGregor hand-picks three eligible
bachelors and conspires to have them meet Laura, Gwendolyn, and
Julia. The three granddaughters are, however, independent, modern
women who do not appreciate Grandfather's interference.
Descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Masquerade RC 45080
by B.J. Hoff 
read by Jill Ferris
2 cassettes
Danni St. John has returned to her hometown of Red Oak, Alabama,
to work as the editor of the newspaper being published by the
Colony, a cult that has established a compound just outside of
town. She soon finds herself involved in a series of terrifying
events, which she investigates with the aid of Sheriff Logan
McGarey, with whom she is falling in love. 1996.
Midnight Lady RC 45017
by Rosemary Rogers 
read by Barbara Caruso
2 cassettes
In 1816, Kyla Van Vleet returns to London to claim her share of
the estate of her late father, the duke of Wolverton. When the
heir to the title, American Brett Banning, denies her right,
virginal Kyla threatens to ruin his reputation by becoming a
whore as her mother had been forced to do. Explicit descriptions
of sex, some strong language, and some violence. Bestseller 1997.
Mischief RC 43441
by Amanda Quick 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Imogen Waterstone has inherited her uncle's Zamarian antiquities,
which she intends to use to trap her friend's killer. Waterstone
gets help from the reluctant earl of Colchester, who was indebted
to her uncle. But Waterstone and Colchester are soon in serious
trouble as corpses pile up. Strong language and some descriptions
of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Miss Jacobson's Journey RC 40938
by Carola Dunn 
read by Miriam Wagner
2 cassettes
In 1802 Miriam Jacobson's parents plan 
a marriage between her and Isaac Cohen, a Talmudic scholar. One
glance at the young, thin, stooped man and Miriam announces she
will, instead, leave London to travel in Russia helping her uncle
with his research. Nine years later, in wartime France, Miriam
promises to help deliver some gold in exchange for safe transport
back to England. In dismay she realizes the man she has agreed to
help is a much-changed Isaac! 1992.
Morning Is a Long Time Coming  
RC 43661
by Bette Greene 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
2 cassettes (Reissue)
En route to Germany in search of the mother's love she has never
known, eighteen-year-old Patty Bergen lingers in Paris and
experiences her first love affair. Sequel to Summer of My German
Soldier (RC 36625). Some strong language. For junior and senior
high readers. 1978.
Mornings of Gold RC 40917
by Carol Marsh 
read by Ellen Frost
2 cassettes
Pursuing her dream as a photographer in New York, Caddy Wilcox
stays with her aunt, sending her earnings home to her younger
brother, who has multiple sclerosis. Shortly after Caddy's fiancé
breaks it off because she won't quit her job, Caddy accepts an
assignment photographing birds on a private island. The short
stay leads to a relationship with the island residents,
especially attorney Fiske Spencer. Strong language. 1995.
Nothing but You: Love Stories from the New Yorker RC 44363
edited by Roger Angell 
read by Faith Potts
4 cassettes
An anthology of romantic stories by postmodernists, ironists, and
other authors recounting their personal encounters with love. In
"The Diver," a young man accidentally falls into the river. A
kindly Parisian seamstress seduces the hapless fellow as she
helps him change his wet clothes. Descriptions of sex. 1997.
The Offer RC 45012
by Catherine Coulter 
read by Barbara Caruso
2 cassettes
Fleeing her ancestral home after an attempted rape by her new
brother-in-law, Lady Sabrina Eversleigh, eighteen, becomes lost
in the forest during a winter blizzard. She is rescued by Phillip
Mercerault, but her reputation is compromised when he takes her
to an unoccupied hunting lodge. Phillip offers marriage, but
Sabrina refuses for his sake. Some descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
The Passion of Dellie O'Barr RC 40982
by Cindy Bonner 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Looking After Lily 
(RC 36944), the youngest De Lony sister has now, in the 1880s,
grown up. Although married to Daniel, a solid and settled man,
Dellie is swept off her feet by Andy, whose political agitation
churns the emotions of the rural Texas town. Throwing aside
convention, Dellie foolishly follows her heart. Explicit
descriptions of sex and some strong language. 1996.
Pearl Moon RC 44450
by Katherine Stone 
read by Mary Kane
3 cassettes
As Hong Kong prepares for the expiration of British rule, the
decision by James Drake to build an opulent hotel in the city
brings together two sisters who have never met-Allison Whitaker,
an American photographer, and Maylene Kwan, a Chinese architect.
1995.
The Rag Nymph RC 43818
by Catherine Cookson 
read by Carol Dines
2 cassettes
At the age of seven, Millie Forester finds herself alone in the
world. Her mother has committed suicide, and her father
disappeared long ago. She is taken in by Raggie Aggie Winkowski
and Ben, a young man Aggie opened her home to years before.
Millie is free-spirited and often finds herself in difficult
situations- especially with men. Ben quietly stays in the
background and rescues her when the need arises. 1991.
The Rake and the Reformer RC 43053
by Mary Jo Putney 
read by Ann Hodapp
3 cassettes
Regency romance in which the notorious Reggie Davenport
unexpectedly inherits an estate. Told that it has been expertly
managed, Reggie has no idea that the manager is in fact a woman,
the striking "spinster" Alys Weston. Tensions mount when they
meet face to face. Strong language and explicit descriptions of
sex. 1989.
Remember When RC 45335
by Judith McNaught 
read by Jill Fox
3 cassettes
Wealthy Diana Foster knew Cole Harrison when she was a teenager
and he worked as a stable boy. Cole now owns a
multimillion-dollar company. They meet again at Houston's White
Orchid Ball and auction just after Diana is jilted by her fiancé.
Cole takes a dramatic step to help Diana save face. Some strong
language and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
River of Sky RC 43808
by Karen Harper 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
In 1835 widowed, impoverished Kate Craig befriends Blue Wing, her
husband's other wife, and together they set out for the Mandan
tribe up the Missouri River, where Kate hopes to set up a fur
trade. Also on the riverboat is Rand, a part-Indian man bent on
saving the Mandans from corrupt traders. Descriptions of sex.
1994.
The Romance: Being the Fifth Volume of the Daughters of
Mannerling RC 44592
by Marion Chesney 
read by Jill Ferris
1 cassette
In this sequel to The Folly (RC 44591), the job of recapturing
the former family estate, Mannerling, falls to Belinda Beverley.
The current owner, Lord St. Clair, is more interested in fashion
than in Mannerling (bought for him by his father). Belinda tries
to develop an interest in him, but St. Clair's friend Lord Gyre
has other ideas. 1997.
Rosehaven RC 45024
by Catherine Coulter 
read by Annie Wauters
3 cassettes
England, 1277. Severin of Langthorne, having returned from the
Holy Land to find his estate in ruin, accepts an offer to wed
Hastings of Trent and become lord of her lands upon her father's
death-which is imminent. Hastings, a strong-willed girl who has
no desire to become obedient to a man she detests, uses her
knowledge of herbal medicine to her benefit. Violence and some
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
The Ruby RC 43162
by Christina Skye 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
4 cassettes
A tale of intrigue set in London and Ceylon in the 1860s. The
beautiful Barrett Winslow's knowledge of her grandfather's
scientific secrets puts her life in jeopardy. The Rajah of
Ranapore rescues her, but draws her into the web of his desire
under the mystical power of the fabled ruby. Strong language,
violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1992.
Sanctuary RC 44635
by Nora Roberts 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
3 cassettes
Twenty years ago Annabelle Hathaway disappeared from her home in
coastal Georgia. Now her oldest daughter, Jo Ellen, a well-known
photographer, is receiving pictures of Annabelle, naked and dead.
Following a mental breakdown, Jo seeks comfort within her
dysfunctional family, but instead she receives more photos.
Violence, some strong language, and some explicit descriptions of
sex. Bestseller 1997.
The Savage Lord Griffin RC 44705
by Joan Smith 
read by Anne Flosnik
1 cassette
When Lord Griffin returns "from the dead" after five years in
Brazil, he finds many changes awaiting him. His cousin has taken
over his estate, his fiancée Myra is betrothed to another, and
Myra's sister, Alice, has grown into a young woman. Naturally
Griffin wants to win back Myra's love. But he makes a big mistake
when he asks Alice to help him. 1993.
Say You Love Me RC 43553
by Johanna Lindsey 
read by Sharon Murray
2 cassettes
Kelsey Langton surprises herself by agreeing to be sold as a
mistress to the highest bidder. But she believes it is the only
way to help her uncle and younger sister. Kelsey is in for more
shocks when she learns the identity of her "owner" and the
secrets he harbors. Some strong language and some explicit
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Seasons of Her Life RC 44286
by Fern Michaels 
read by Ilona Dulaski
5 cassettes
In the spring of her life, Ruby escapes an abusive father and
servile mother, heads to Washington, D.C., and becomes an
admiral's secretary. "Summer" finds Ruby with two children and an
abusive husband. In her "fall," Ruby starts a cookie business
with a friend and finds happiness in her "winter." Strong
language and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
A Secret Affair RC 43476
by Barbara Taylor Bradford 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
1 cassette
Bill Fitzgerald, foreign war correspondent, and Vanessa Stewart,
glass designer, meet in Venice. An immediate attraction starts an
affair during which they rendezvous several times in the U.S.
Then at a planned tryst in Venice, one of them does not appear.
Some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Shades of Twilight RC 44045
by Linda Howard 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
3 cassettes
When her parents and aunt die in an accident, Roanna Davenport
and her conniving, illegitimate cousin, Jessie, move to their
grandmother Lucinda's Alabama estate. Lucinda's great-nephew and
heir, Webb, marries Jessie, much to Roanna's secret sorrow. Then
Jessie's past rips the family apart. Strong language, explicit
descriptions of sex, and some violence. Bestseller 1996.
Shameless RC 44184
by Jennifer Blake 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
Camilla Greenley Hutton's divorce is almost final when her
husband, Keith, decides he doesn't want to let her go. It seems
Cammie may be heiress to the town's paper mill (currently owned
by Reid Sayers), because of an old feud between two Louisiana
families. Then Keith is found murdered and Cammie and Reid become
suspects. Some strong language and some explicit descriptions of
sex. 1994.
Sharing Sam RC 39994
by Katherine Applegate 
read by Jeanne Evans
1 cassette
Alison, a junior, is fascinated by the new boy at school, Sam
Cody. But shortly after they meet, her best friend, Izzy, is
diagnosed with a fatal brain tumor. Realizing that Izzy is
attracted to Sam, too, Alison decides to put her own budding
relationship on hold and convince Sam to devote himself to Izzy
during the girl's last few months. Some strong language. For
junior and senior high readers. 1995.
Small Town Girl RC 43784
by LaVyrle Spencer 
read by Sharon Murray
3 cassettes
Country-music star Tess McPhail returns home to care for her
mother, who had hip surgery. But all Tess can think about is the
month she's wasting while so much work is waiting in Nashville.
To make matters worse, Kenny Kronek, the boy-next-door she
taunted throughout school, has become her mother's best friend.
Some strong language and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller
1997.
Special Delivery RC 44765
by Danielle Steel 
read by Pam Ward
1 cassette
At fifty-nine, entrepreneur and confirmed playboy Jack Watson
becomes attracted to Amanda, his son's widowed mother-in-law.
Their romance blossoms, overcoming family resistance and yielding
an unexpected blessing. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
Splendor RC 45284
by Brenda Joyce 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
3 cassettes
The daughter of a London bookseller, Carolyn Browne is an
enlightened 
eighteen-year-old who has been writing articles for the Morning
Chronicle under the name of Charles Copperville. When she
lampoons Prince Nicholas Sverayov of Russia, he seeks out
Copperville, quickly uncovering Carolyn's identity and beginning
a new game of deception. Some explicit descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
Straight for the Heart RC 43087
by Marsha Canham 
read by Carol Dines
3 cassettes
The stakes are high for Montana Rose, a lady gambler on the
Mississippi riverboats. Her true identity is discovered by the
dashing Yankee Michael Tarrington as Rose struggles to save the
family plantation from ruin after the Civil War. Strong language
and explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
Sweet Awakening RC 44662
by Marjorie Farrell 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
2 cassettes
Lord Giles Whitton and his twin, Lady Sabrina, first met Lady
Clare Dysart when they were thirteen and Clare was ten. Now,
eight years later, everyone expects Giles and Clare to marry, but
having received no declaration of love from Giles, Clare marries
Lord Justin Rainsborough. Justin soon reveals a violent side.
Some descriptions of sex. 1995.
Temptation's Kiss RC 45145
by Sandra Brown 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
1 cassette
The memory of Josh Bennett's passionate kiss the night before her
wedding to his good friend James Lambert has haunted Megan,
especially since James's death three years ago. Now
Josh-handsome, wealthy, and powerful-wants to fulfill the
potential of that kiss, but Megan needs to be convinced of his
sincerity. Descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1983.
Then Came Heaven RC 45146
by LaVyrle Spencer 
read by Annie Wauters
2 cassettes
In 1950s Browerville, Minnesota, Eddie Olczak, devastated by the
death of his wife, and Sister Regina, his children's teacher,
come to terms with the special feelings they have for each other.
Some strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Tidings of Great Joy RC 45342
by Sandra Brown 
read by Ann Hodapp
1 cassette
A romantic Christmas Eve encounter results in pregnancy for
architect Ria Lavender. Her lover is the town's mayor-elect,
Taylor MacKensie. For the child's legitimacy and for political
reasons, the two marry and move in together. But will
circumstances and past lovers allow them to continue their sham?
Explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1987.
Timeswept Bride RC 45096
by Eugenia Riley 
read by Jill Ferris
3 cassettes
Just weeks before her wedding, Priscilla Pemberton is dumped by
J. Ackerly Frost V. Now she will never have a place on
Galveston's social register. As she walks on the beach drowning
her sorrows in Dom Perignon, Priscilla finds an old bottle with a
note inside: "Accursed tide, bring me a bride." Suddenly she is
overcome by a huge wave and finds herself in 1880s Galveston.
Some descriptions of sex. 1995.
To Love Again RC 44158
by Bertrice Small 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
Britain, A.D. 453. Cailin Drusus is a young woman when her family
is destroyed and she must flee to her maternal grandfather.
Forced to spend the night with Wulf Ironfist, a guest of her
grandfather's, Cailin, with Wulf's help, develops a plan to
regain her lost lands. But soon afterwards, Cailin is drugged and
sold into slavery. Explicit descriptions of sex and some
violence. 1993.
Treacherous Beauties RC 39984
by Cheryl Emerson 
read by Nancy Kronenfeld
2 cassettes
After her mother, brother, and husband die within six months of
each other, thirty-year-old Annabelle dreams her brother Alan is
begging her to help him. Annabelle moves to Alan's town of
Rahunta, Georgia, and anonymously takes a job with the
Forresters, who may be connected with the fall that killed Alan.
As Annabelle searches for clues, she becomes attracted to Jason
Forrester. Some strong language and some explicit descriptions of
sex. 1993.
The Unlikely Angel RC 44437
by Betina Krahn 
read by Anne Flosnik
2 cassettes
London, 1882. Aunt Olivia often asked Madeline Duncan what she
would do with a million pounds. Now Madeline has become extremely
wealthy. But her aunt's solicitors are appalled at Madeline's
plans to do good with the money and have an overseer appointed to
watch her-the very attractive Cole Mandeville. Some explicit
descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Wedding RC 44078
by Julie Garwood 
read by Ann Hodapp
3 cassettes
In twelfth-century Scotland, Lady Brenna is on her way to an
arranged marriage with Laird MacNare when her party is attacked
by Laird MacAlister. MacAlister, to whom she proposed when she
was just a child, forces Lady Brenna to marry him. Explicit
descriptions of sex, some strong language, and some violence.
Bestseller 1996.
Wild Is My Love RC 43078
by Janelle Taylor 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
3 cassettes
A mysterious stranger arrives to rescue Princess Alysa, who is
captive in her father's besieged kingdom. Trapped by destiny, the
stranger and Alysa struggle to reclaim her lost legacy and
consummate the passionate love that they share. Violence and
descriptions of sex. 1987.
Wish List RC 44087
by Fern Michaels 
read by Sharon Murray
2 cassettes
Ariel Hart is approaching the big Five-O, and two husbands and a
brilliant acting career have not made her happy. Now she is on
the skids, and her "wish list" is growing. If only she could
recapture the way she felt at sixteen when she and Felix Sanchez
were secretly married in Tijuana. Perhaps if she returns to her
childhood home of Chula Vista, life will improve. Strong language
and some explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Science Fiction
The Anvil: The General, Book 3  
RC 43663
by S.M. Stirling and David Drake 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
In this sequel to The Hammer (RC 43662), General Raj Whitehall,
victorious in battle and adored by his people and soldiers, has
nearly united planet Bellevue. Attempting to undo his efforts,
however, is the jealous Governor Barholm Clerett, who sees the
general as a major obstacle to his own ambitions. Strong language
and violence. 1993.
Before the Storm: The Black Fleet Crisis, Book 1 RC 44589
by Michael P. Kube-McDowell 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
Since the Empire has been vanquished, the New Republic has
entered an era of tranquil harmony under the leadership of the
Jedi Knights. Then a series of events disrupts the peace: Luke
ventures off on a perilous rescue mission to his mother's
homeworld, Lando confronts a menacing spacecraft, and Leia
attempts to avert a war. Prequel to Shield of Lies (RC 44590).
1996.
Blue Mars RC 43603
by Kim Stanley Robinson 
read by John Stratton
5 cassettes
In this sequel to Green Mars (RC 42050), the red planet has
become green with seas and settlements, while Earth is in peril.
Settlers on Mars are drawn into a fierce struggle between the
Reds, who want to preserve Mars as desert, and the Green
terraformers, who want to cultivate it. The battle plunges Mars
into an ice age and threatens Earth's future. 1996.
The Bones of Time RC 43483
by Kathleen Ann Goonan 
read by Dani Carr
3 cassettes
In twenty-first century Hawaii, young Cen is in love with a woman
from the past, which drives him to solve the mysteries of time
travel. Meanwhile Linda, a geneticist, rescues a clone derived
from the bones of a long-dead Hawaiian king. The bones prove to
be the key to time travel and help Cen and Linda join forces to
liberate the exploited Hawaiian people. Strong language. 1996.
The Caves of Steel RC 44325
by Isaac Asimov 
read by Ken Kliban
2 cassettes (Reissue)
A thousand years in the future, Earth's teeming billions are
crowded into huge enclosed cities. New York City detective Elijah
Baley is forced to team up with an android to solve the murder of
a prominent spacer from the outer worlds. Failure will jeopardize
any hope of Earth's overcrowded population reaching out to the
stars. 1954.
Children of the Mind RC 44602
by Orson Scott Card 
read by Bob Askey
3 cassettes
In this sequel to Xenocide (RC 34265), Lusitania is threatened
with destruction by the Starways Congress, which believes the
planet to be infected with an insidious virus. Ender Wiggin and
his computer intelligence, Jane, race against time to locate new
worlds and save the races of Lusitania before the cataclysm.
1996.
The Chronicles of Pern: First Fall  
RC 44409
by Anne McCaffrey 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Five stories about the early adventures 
of humans on the dragon planet, Pern. Includes stories on the
discovery of Pern by humans, the human liaison with the
indigenous flying dragons, the first battle with the deadly
Threadfall, and the final isolation of the planet from the rest
of humanity. Sequel to All the Weyrs of Pern (RC 34008). 1993.
The Chrysalids RC 44711
by John Wyndham 
read by Rick Rohan
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Science fiction about fanatical survivors of an atomic war who
are obsessed with weeding out all mutants in the population. The
"different" ones are condemned to a hideous exile, and children
are careful to hide their "differences" even from their zealous
parents. First published in Great Britain in 1955. Published
later in the United States under the title Re-birth. 1955.
CivilWarLand in Bad Decline: Stories and a Novella RC 43170
by George Saunders 
read by Bob Askey
1 cassette
Six short stories and one novella that paint a frightful and
bleak-though darkly humorous-portrait of future America. In the
novella Bounty, severe environmental degradation produces a
population of genetically mutant "Flaweds," who must service the
ranking "Normals." Some strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 1996.
Cloud's Rider RC 44893
by C.J. Cherryh 
read by Vanessa Maroney
3 cassettes
Danny Fisher and his nighthorse, Cloud, rescue three children
from a village destroyed by telepathic predators. Danny and Cloud
battle the rigors of the High Wild winter to bring the youths to
safety. But more perilous dangers await them, including human
greed and a powerful rogue nighthorse. Sequel to Rider at the
Gate (RC 42261). Strong language. 1996.
Crisis on Doona RC 43872
by Anne McCaffrey and Jody Lynn Nye 
read by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
For twenty-five years, humans and the catlike Hrrubans have lived
in harmony on the planet Doona. Human diplomat Todd Reeve and his
inseparable Hrruban friend, Hrriss, symbolize the peaceful
relationship between the two races. But xenophobic politicians,
who want to disrupt the peace, target Todd and Hrriss with
trumped-up charges of theft and 
treason. Sequel to Decision at Doona 
(RC 43871). 1992.
Crystal Line RC 44960
by Anne McCaffrey 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Now almost two centuries old, Killashandra Ree enjoys the
longevity conferred by her trade as a crystal cutter on the
planet Ballybran. But the crystal symbiont also causes a
progressive loss of memory. When her longtime lover investigates
a new crystal that can restore her memories, she faces a
difficult choice. Sequel to Killashandra (RC 24201). Some
descriptions of sex. 1992.
Decision at Doona RC 43871
by Anne McCaffrey 
read by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
Seeking to escape an overcrowded and stagnant Earth, human
colonists travel to a new planet called Doona. They discover that
a sentient race of cat-like beings already inhabits the planet,
and the colonists must make a painful decision between abandoning
their new home or learning to coexist with the alien race.
Followed by Crisis at Doona (RC 43872). 1969.
Devil in the Sky RC 44943
by Greg Cox and John Gregory Betancourt 
read by James DeLotel
2 cassettes
The life-forms of Janus VI, called the Hortas, have the ability
to burn through solid rock and metal as easily as humans walk
through air. Commander Sisko of Deep Space Nine gets involved
when a mother Horta is abducted by Cardassians while being
transported to Bajor to help with the mining industry. A Star
Trek: Deep Space Nine novel. 1995.
The Dolphins of Pern RC 44410
by Anne McCaffrey 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
As the struggle against the deadly Thread spores continues in the
Dragonriders of Pern series, humans rediscover the planet's
long-forgotten dolphins. Rebuilding the connection between land
and sea rekindles the old dream of an ideal Pern. Sequel to The
Chronicles of Pern: First Fall (RC 44409). 1994.
Dragonseye RC 44828
by Anne McCaffrey 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
It's been over two hundred years since the deadly silver strands
called Thread fell from the skies of Pern. Now a new generation
of Dragonriders unite in their efforts to prepare for the next
cycle of Threadfall. But one of the Lord Holders refuses to
cooperate and jeopardizes the safety of all. Sequel to The
Dolphins of Pern 
(RC 44410). 1997.
Dune RC 44126
by Frank Herbert 
read by J.P. Linton
4 cassettes (Reissue)
In this science fiction novel with sociological and religious
overtones, an exile with psychic powers becomes the prophet of
the savage people on the planet Dune. Prequel to Dune Messiah (RC
19126). 1965.
The Eternal Savage RC 45280
by Edgar Rice Burroughs 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
A hundred thousand years ago, Nu, the son of Nu, was trapped in a
cave during an earthquake. Now, American Victoria Custer is in
Africa for some big game hunting when another earthquake hits.
The terrified Victoria faints and awakens to find herself facing
the man she has dreamed of all her life-Nu, the son of Nu. Some
violence. 1914.
Evolution's Shore RC 43900
by Ian McDonald 
read by Mary Woods
3 cassettes
A meteor strikes Africa's Mt. Kilimanjaro in 2002. Soon the
"Chaga," an alien plant form, spreads across Africa, transforming
all life in its path. Reporter Gaby McAslan struggles to uncover
the truth about government secrecy, missing persons, and
"research camps." Some strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 1995.
The Fearful Summons RC 44180
by Denny Martin Flinn 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
The Thraxians, a little-known race on the galactic frontier,
kidnap the crew of the Federation starship Excelsior and demand
powerful weapons in exchange for the release of the hostages.
Captain Kirk and the former officers of the starship Enterprise
reunite to undertake a rescue mission. A Star Trek novel. 1995.
The Ferengi Rules of Acquisition  
RC 44033
by Ira Steven Behr 
read by James DeLotel
1 cassette
The guiding principles that have made the Ferengi the most
successful, if unscrupulous, businessmen in the galaxy include
such gems as "greed is eternal," "never place friendship above
profit," "once you have their money . . . you never give it
back," and "keep your lies consistent." Seventy of these adages
are offered by Quark, the profit-motivated Ferengi barkeep of
Deep Space Nine. A Star Trek: Deep Space Nine treatise. 1995.
A Fisherman of the Inland Sea: Science Fiction Stories RC 43403
by Ursula K. Le Guin 
read by Ted Stoddard
2 cassettes
Eight tales that delve into the relationship between perception
and reality, and explore the "churten" effect, a way of moving
objects and people between distant worlds at the speed of light.
In the title story, a churten researcher is flung backward in
time to face a choice of alternative futures. Some strong
language. 1994.
The Forge: The General, Book 1 
RC 43242
by S.M. Stirling and David Drake 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
In this prequel to The Hammer 
(RC 43662), a young military officer discovers a sentient battle
computer, a relic from before his planet's fall. Guided by the
computer, he leads his people against enemy barbarians as he
contends with the treachery of his own civil government. Strong
language and violence. 1991.
Georgia on My Mind and Other Places  RC 41666
by Charles Sheffield 
read by Gary Telles
3 cassettes
Collection of fourteen science fiction stories covering a wide
range of topics and settings. The title piece is the 1993 Nebula
Award-winning novelette about Charles Babbage's analytical engine
of 1850, the forerunner of the modern computer. Other stories
include "Beyond the Golden Road," "Humanity Test," "Destroyer of
Worlds," "Millennium," "The Fifteenth Station of the Cross," and
"Health Care System." 1995.
The Hammer: The General, Book 2  
RC 43662
by S.M. Stirling and David Drake 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
In this sequel to The Forge (RC 43242), General Raj Whitehall,
guided by his computer, attempts to reunite the Holy Federation
and rebuild the planet's civilization. Opposing his efforts,
however, are barbarian forces, suspicious government officials,
and resistance from his own men. Strong language and violence.
1992.
Happy Policeman RC 40920
by Patricia Anthony 
read by Anne Mullen
2 cassettes
Six years ago aliens came to the small Texas town of Coomey and
sealed it off from whatever might remain of the rest of the
world. The aliens are mysterious but apparently harmless, and the
townsfolk have resumed their normal lives as much as possible.
But when one of the citizens is found dead, police chief DeWitt
Dawson faces a mystery with consequences far greater than simple
murder. Strong language and some explicit descriptions of sex.
1994.
Harvest the Fire RC 44528
by Poul Anderson 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
1 cassette
Jesse Nicol is a poet out of time looking for inspiration in a
world now dominated by the vast machine intelligence called the
Teramind. His quest takes him to the moon and to a beautiful
revolutionary who is determined to escape from the tyranny of the
machine. Sequel to The Stars Are Also Fire (RC 40383). 1995.
Here There Be Dragons RC 44946
by John Peel 
read by Gary Tipton
2 cassettes
Captain Jean-Luc Picard and the crew of the starship Enterprise
discover a world of knights, serfs, and dragons reminiscent of
Earth's Middle Ages. The technology driving this new world is by
no means primitive, however, and before long the Enterprise is
under attack from an unknown but highly sophisticated weapons
system. A Star Trek: The Next Generation novel. 1993.
Into the Nebula RC 44646
by Gene DeWeese 
read by Gary Tipton
2 cassettes
While exploring a nebular dust cloud, Captain Picard and the crew
of the USS Enterprise discover a planet on which life and
civilization are dying for no obvious reason. With their lives
hanging in the balance, the crew investigates. A Star Trek: The
Next Generation novel. 1995.
Islands in the Net RC 43055
by Bruce Sterling 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
In the twenty-first century, data is power, and it is closely
rationed through a global communications network. Laura Webster
is a bright young star who manages information at a multinational
firm. Her secure life suddenly changes when she descends into a
vicious high-tech underworld. Strong language and descriptions of
sex. 1988.
The Killing Star RC 44727
by Charles Pellegrino and 
George Zebrowski 
read by Stephen Angus
2 cassettes
In 2076 an unknown alien race attacks the solar system,
obliterating life on Earth and in the human colonies on the other
planets. The handful of humans left alive in space stations
between the planets find themselves hiding and trying to come to
grips with the imminent extinction of their species. Some strong
language. 1995.
The Left Hand of Darkness RC 43166
by Ursula K. Le Guin 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Confused and afraid, a lone human becomes the pawn in an intrigue
on Gethen, a planet inhabited by creatures that are neither male
nor female. They are not neuters but have the potential to be
either man or woman. Originally published in 1969. Hugo and
Nebula Awards. 1976.
Manhattan Transfer RC 43573
by John E. Stith 
read by James DeLotel
3 cassettes
Without warning, all of Manhattan is swept into space by an alien
force and encased in a giant bubble. The trapped humans soon
discover that their city is but one of many that have been
kidnapped. A small group devises a way to escape and attempts to
communicate with people in other bubbles. Some strong language.
1993.
Mind Light RC 44885
by Margaret Davis 
read by Stephen Angus
3 cassettes
The Michaelsons are in danger of losing their starship unless
they can find another pilot. Greg Lukas is available, but his
personality is prickly and there is some disgrace in his past.
The Michaelsons give him the job, but become apprehensive when
Lukas begins recalling suppressed memories. Some violence. 1992.
Mirrorshades: The Cyberpunk Anthology RC 42197
edited by Bruce Sterling 
read by Gary Telles
2 cassettes
Twelve stories of Cyberpunk science fiction, a genre that mixes
high-tech science with streetwise pop culture to create
nightmarish futures. Includes "The Gernsback Continuum" by
William Gibson, "Snake-Eyes" by Tom Maddox, "Rock On" by Pat
Cadigan, "Petra" by Greg Bear, and "Mozart in Mirrorshades" by
Bruce Sterling and Lewis Shiner. Strong language, violence, and
explicit descriptions of sex. 1986.
Nebula Awards 29: SFWA's Choices for the Best Science Fiction and
Fantasy of the Year RC 44096
edited by Pamela Sargent 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes
Includes the 1993 choices of the Science Fiction and Fantasy
Writers of America for best novel, novella, novelette, and short
story. Nonfiction entries include the Rhysling Awards for poetry,
essays on new science fiction and fantasy works, memorials to
deceased authors, and a survey of 1993 movies. Strong language,
violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
Nebula Awards 30: SFWA's Choices for the Best Science Fiction and
Fantasy of the Year RC 43079
edited by Pamela Sargent 
read by James DeLotel
3 cassettes
The year's best stories, poems, and essays in science fiction and
fantasy. In "Seven Views of Olduvai Gorge," alien anthropologists
discover that members of the now-extinct human race had been
slaughtering each other on Earth even before they reached the
stars and wreaked havoc there. Strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 1996.
Nebula Awards 31: SFWA's Choices for the Best Science Fiction and
Fantasy of the Year RC 44618
edited by Pamela Sargent 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
Includes the 1995 Nebula Award winners for novella, novelette,
and short story as well as some of the runner-ups. Also includes
memorials to John Brunner and Roger Zelazny, a tribute to A.E.
Van Vogt, the Rhysling Award winners for poetry, and a list of
films. General information on the Nebula Awards is given in
articles, essays, and appendixes. Some strong language. 1997.
Night Sky Mine RC 44254
by Melissa Scott 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
Ista Kelly, now a teenager, is a foundling without an identity.
And in the cyberspace world of Night Sky Mine, to have any kind
of future, people must know their origins. As Ista searches out
her past, she uncovers a terrible menace hidden by the Night Sky
Mining Corporation. Strong language. 1996.
Orion RC 44641
by Ben Bova 
read by Bruce Huntey
2 cassettes
John O'Ryan saves a beautiful woman from a terrorist's bomb in a
Manhattan restaurant. Thus he begins an extraordinary adventure
to combat the great enemy of humankind, an adventure that takes
him through time and space from the Stone Age of the Neanderthals
to a future Earth on the brink of nuclear annihilation. Prequel
to Vengeance of Orion 
(RC 44642). Violence and some strong language. 1984.
The Other End of Time RC 44464
by Frederik Pohl 
read by Rick Rohan
2 cassettes
A diverse group of humans investigating an abandoned orbital
laboratory are kidnapped by aliens. The humans find themselves in
a nightmarish environment of advanced technology, clones of
themselves, and warring alien factions. But the biggest threat to
their survival may well be their own interpersonal clashes.
Strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1996.
Out of the Silent Planet RC 44319
by C.S. Lewis 
read by Graeme Malcolm
1 cassette (Reissue)
In this prequel to Perelandra (RC 23329), Elwin Ransom is
abducted by a deranged physicist and transported by spaceship to
the planet Malacandra. Aware of his captor's malign intentions,
Ransom escapes upon landing and finds a world populated by
gargantuan creatures who live by an alien moral code. 1943.
Peace on Earth RC 43781
by Stanislaw Lem 
read by James DeLotel
2 cassettes
Earth's governments have agreed to export the arms race to the
moon, where highly intelligent, self-evolving weaponry battle
each other without human carnage. Nevertheless, the Lunar Agency
dispatches Ijon Tichy, of Memoirs of a Space Traveler (RC 19264),
to investigate. Tichy returns to Earth profoundly altered. 1994.
Planet of Twilight RC 44829
by Barbara Hambly 
read by Chuck Benson
3 cassettes
Luke Skywalker, Princess Leia, and the heroes of the New Republic
continue their struggle against forces of the Empire when the
ruthless warlord Seti Draconis decides to take over the
mysterious planet Renat Chorios. But Renat Chorios harbors a
deadly secret that neither the Empire nor the New Republic is
prepared to face. A Star Wars novel. Bestseller 1997.
Podkayne of Mars RC 44627
by Robert A. Heinlein 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Indomitable young Podkayne (Poddy) Fries jumps at the chance to
accompany her uncle Tom on a mission to Earth. The only drawback
is that she'll have her loathsome little brother along for the
trip. But even greater dangers face the niece of a diplomat from
Mars who has powerful enemies. For junior and senior high and
older readers. 1963.
Remake RC 40913
by Connie Willis 
read by Anne Mullen
1 cassette
Tom works as a film editor in twenty-first-century Hollywood
where all the new movies are digital remakes of twentieth-century
movies. Between episodes in the Hollywood drug-and-sex scene, he
is immersed in the lore of old movies and the technology of an
industry that no longer uses live actors. Then he meets Alis, a
star-struck young girl determined to be in the movies. Strong
language. For senior high and older readers. 1995.
The Ringworld Throne RC 44067
by Larry Niven 
read by James DeLotel
3 cassettes
This sequel to The Ringworld Engineers (RC 17471) begins with a
tour of the habitat of six hundred trillion square miles that
rings a distant sun. When explorer Louis Wu returns to save
Ringworld from colliding with its sun, he finds a society beset
by violence. Violence. 1996.
Sailing Bright Eternity RC 44648
by Gregory Benford 
read by John Polk
3 cassettes
Nigel Walmsley of the twentieth century meets Toby Bishop and the
last remnants of humanity in a far-future space-time shelter at
the galactic center. Here they prepare for the final battle with
the implacable mechs, who are determined to obliterate all traces
of humankind. Sequel to Furious Gulf (RC 42137). 1995.
Shield of Lies: The Black Fleet Crisis, Book 2 RC 44590
by Michael P. Kube-McDowell 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Before the Storm 
(RC 44589), Lando is abducted aboard an unidentified spacecraft,
while Leia contends with a threat to the stability of the New
Republic. Han departs on a deep-space voyage, where he engages a
fleet of warships in a battle that could doom civilization.
Bestseller 1996.
The Siege RC 45125
by Peter David 
read by James DeLotel
2 cassettes
A murderer is loose aboard Deep Space Nine, and Commander Sisko
and Security Chief Odo are unable to identify him or deduce his
motive. It becomes apparent that they are dealing with a
psychopathic shapeshifter who, like Security Chief Odo, can
assume the shape of any object, inanimate or living, to escape
detection. A Star Trek: Deep Space Nine novel. 1993.
Somewhere East of Life RC 43855
by Brian Aldiss 
read by Andrew Seear
4 cassettes
British architectural expert Roy Burnell, whose work takes him
around the world, is vacationing in Budapest. Rogue neurosurgeons
steal part of his memory and sell choice bits on the black
market, where experiencing other people's lives is the latest
entertainment craze. Burnell seeks to recover his memory. Some
strong language and some descriptions of sex. 1994.
The Sparrow RC 43892
by Mary Doria Russell 
read by Rick Rohan
4 cassettes
It is the year 2059 when Jesuit priest Emilio Sandoz returns as
the sole survivor of a forty-year space voyage to Alpha Centauri.
Broken in body and spirit, Sandoz describes his horrific
captivity by aliens and life in a depraved civilization. Strong
language, violence, and descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Steel: The General, Book 4
RC 43664
by S.M. Stirling and David Drake 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
Though General Raj Whitehall has been largely victorious in his
battles against barbarian forces, he must still face the superior
numbers of the Brigade before the Civil Government of Holy
Federation can be united. Sequel to The Anvil 
(RC 43663). Strong language, violence, and some descriptions of
sex. 1993.
The Sword: The General, Book 5  
RC 43665
by S.M. Stirling and David Drake 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
In this sequel to The Steel (RC 43664), the last of the barbarian
forces-the Brigade-has submitted to the authority of the
Federation, but the fighting continues. Meanwhile Governor
Barholm Clerett considers the powerful General Raj Whitehall a
traitor and wants him dead. Strong language, violence, and some
descriptions of sex. 1995.
Tek Money RC 43639
by William Shatner 
read by J.P. Linton
2 cassettes
Old friend and Tek addict Peter Traynor appears one night at Jake
Cardigan's door in a demented state, then suddenly dies. It seems
that he was done in with a Tek "sizzler"-a chip implanted in his
brain. Jake's efforts to solve the crime involve him in an
illegal weapons ring, high stakes, and personal risk. Strong
language. 1995.
That Hideous Strength RC 44320
by C.S. Lewis 
read by Graeme Malcolm
3 cassettes (Reissue)
This sequel to Perelandra (RC 23329) finds rival professors
Ransom and Weston at Bracton College, as members of an evil
technocratic society are planning to "recondition" mankind with
the aid of the resurrected wizard Merlin. Ransom leads an
opposition group in a climactic clash with the forces of evil.
1945.
3001: The Final Odyssey RC 44314
by Arthur C. Clarke 
read by John Stratton
2 cassettes
After being killed and abandoned in space, twenty-first-century
astronaut Frank Poole is revived a thousand years in the future.
He finds that humanity has spread throughout the solar system and
lives in a state of near utopia. But all is not well in the third
millenium. The mysterious black monoliths are still present and
may now pose a threat. Sequel to 2061: Odyssey Three (RC 26047).
1997.
Timequake RC 45015
by Kurt Vonnegut 
read by John Stratton
1 cassette
On February 13, 2001, the universe will revert back to February
17, 1991, and everyone will relive the next ten years exactly as
they did in the past. A decade later, time will again move
forward, but where will that leave people who, facing new
experiences, have forgotten how to think for themselves? Strong
language. Bestseller 1997.
To Fear the Light RC 43588
by Ben Bova and A.J. Austin 
read by Gary Tipton
3 cassettes
In this sequel to To Save the Sun 
(RC 38739), Adela emerges from two centuries of cold sleep to
resume her project to save the Earth's dying sun. Finding her new
world in conflict and dissolution, she joins a voyage to a
distant planet and encounters a new life form. 1994.
Treaty at Doona RC 43873
by Anne McCaffrey and Jody Lynn Nye 
read by Mary Woods
3 cassettes
Human diplomat Todd Reeve and his lifelong Hrrubian friend,
Hrriss, disagree sharply over opening up their world, Doona, to
free trade. As politicians debate the issue, a new alien species,
the Gringg, comes to Doona wishing to trade. The huge bearlike
Gringg spark feelings of xenophobia and distrust in humans and
Hrrubians, and once again Doona's peaceful coexistence is at
risk. Sequel to Crisis on Doona (RC 43872). 1994.
Tyrant's Test: The Black Fleet Crisis, Book 3 RC 45092
by Michael P. Kube-McDowell 
read by Jim Zeiger
3 cassettes
Under the leadership of Princess Leia, the New Republic faces its
final battle with the deadly Duskhan league, led by the evil Nil
Spaar of the Yevetha. As battle plans are drawn up, Han Solo is
captured by the enemy, while Chewbacca, Lando, and Luke Skywalker
remain away on other quests. A Star Wars novel, sequel to Shield
of Lies (RC 44590). Bestseller 1996.
Vengeance of Orion RC 44642
by Ben Bova 
read by Bruce Huntey
2 cassettes
Orion must do the bidding of his creator Ormazd, who wants to
change time and history. Ormazd sends Orion back to the ancient
world of Greece to participate 
as a warrior in the Trojan War and to 
rescue Helen of Troy. Sequel to Orion 
(RC 44641). Violence. 1988.
War Drums RC 44058
by John Vornholt 
read by Gary Tipton
2 cassettes
On the colony world of Selva, a small band of Klingons, survivors
of a long-ago space wreck, have reverted to a savage state and
are attacking the human settlement. Lieutenant Worf of the
starship Enterprise leads a landing party to contact the
Klingons. An all-out war between the Klingons and the human
colonists appears to be inevitable. In addition, Worf learns that
a more deadly force is at work on the planet. A Star Trek: The
Next Generation novel. 1992.
Winter of Fire RC 44571
by Sherryl Jordan 
read by Ann Hodapp
2 cassettes
On a cold, sunless world, Elsha grows up a child of the Quelled,
a race of slaves ruled over by the Chosen. But Elsha has strange
visions and a strength of spirit that set her apart from the
others, and she becomes the key to the future survival of her
people and her planet. For junior and senior high and older
readers. 1992.
Short Stories
After Rain RC 43805
by William Trevor 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
Stories that portray characters who experience setbacks,
emotional collapse, new insights, and life's renewal. In the
title story, a woman revisits the Italian pension where her
family vacationed during her childhood. There she realizes that
she herself has been the cause of her failed romances and other
problems. 1996.
American Eyes: New Asian-American Short Stories for Young Adults  
RC 43701
edited by Lori M. Carlson 
read by Annie Wauters
1 cassette
Ten short stories that address aspects of the Asian American
experience and touch upon such themes as alienation, cultural
identity, and generational differences. In "Blonde" an Asian
American girl yearns to be blonde like her Barbie doll. For
junior and senior high readers. 1994.
The Ballad of the Sad Café and Other Stories RC 41948
by Carson McCullers 
read by Barbara Rappaport
1 cassette
Collection of short stories about human relationships by the
Southern author. The title novella relates the story of a café
that enlivens a small town and of a stranger who brings love. The
other selections include "Wunderkind," "The Jockey," "Madame
Zilensky and the King of Finland," "The Sojourner," "A Domestic
Dilemma," and "A Tree-a Rock-a Cloud." 1951.
Barking at a Fox-Fur Coat RC 44471
by Donald Davis 
read by Robert Sams
2 cassettes
A noted storyteller shares seventeen homespun yarns from rural
North Carolina. Blending oral tradition and creative fiction, the
stories recount the humorous antics of crafty Uncle Frank, a
master of practical jokes and tall tales. 1990.
Barrel Fever: Stories and Essays  
RC 40676
by David Sedaris 
read by Ray Hagen
2 cassettes
Darkly humorous stories include "Parade," in which the
protagonist claims homosexual affairs with such celebrities as
Mike Tyson and Bruce Springsteen, and "Music for Lovers," in
which a tight-fisted man's homemade casts cause his daughter to
lose her feet. Originally broadcast on NPR, the essay "SantaLand
Diaries" relates Sedaris's most frightening occupation: Christmas
elf at Macy's. Strong language and some explicit descriptions of
sex. 1994.
Because They Wanted To: Stories  
RC 44015
by Mary Gaitskill 
read by Manya LaBruja
2 cassettes
Stories about women, some bisexual, and the secrets, lies,
misunderstandings, and betrayals in their love relationships.
"The Dentist" tells of a woman's perverse obsession with her
stodgy dentist, who resists her sexual advances. Strong language,
violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
The Best American Short Stories 1996  RC 43660
edited by John Edgar Wideman 
read by Barry Bernson
3 cassettes
Twenty-four stories with multicultural themes by new and
well-known writers. "The Eve of the Spirit Festival," by Lan
Chang, chronicles the uneasy assimilation of an Asian widower and
his two daughters. In Mary Gordon's "Intertextuality," a woman
creates a vivid portrait of her Irish grandmother. Descriptions
of sex and some strong language. Bestseller 1996.
Beyond Dreams: True-to-Life Series from Hamilton High RC 43133
by Marilyn Reynolds 
read by Mary Woods
1 cassette
Six stories about Hamilton High students dealing with problems.
In "Only If 
You Think So," Jason is transferred to Sojourner High until his
grades improve. Despite his father's digs about "slowburner"
school, Jason learns not to think of himself as a loser. In other
stories, teen mothers make decisions to better their lives.
Strong language, some violence, and some descriptions of sex. For
junior and senior high readers. 1995.
The Blue Woman and Other Stories  
RC 43638
by Mary Flanagan 
read by Barbara Caruso
2 cassettes
A series of diverse tales about the lives 
of women, ranging from an abused and frightened girl to an old
woman in a nursing home. In the title story a British couple
uncovers their mutual hostility while on holiday in Greece. The
stories share a theme of women's caring and empathy for others.
Some strong language. 1994.
The Chronicles of Pern: First Fall  
RC 44409
by Anne McCaffrey 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Five stories about the early adventures 
of humans on the dragon planet, Pern. Includes stories on the
discovery of Pern by humans, the human liaison with the
indigenous flying dragons, the first battle with the deadly
Threadfall, and the final isolation of the planet from the rest
of humanity. Sequel to All the Weyrs of Pern (RC 34008). 1993.
CivilWarLand in Bad Decline: Stories and a Novella RC 43170
by George Saunders 
read by Bob Askey
1 cassette
Six short stories and one novella that paint a frightful and
bleak-though darkly humorous-portrait of future America. In the
novella Bounty, severe environmental degradation produces a
population of genetically mutant "Flaweds," who must service the
ranking "Normals." Some strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 1996.
Cold Snap: Stories RC 43251
by Thom Jones 
read by Ray Foushee
2 cassettes
Ten dark stories on themes of war, disease, and squalor. In the
title story, a defrocked doctor finds relief from his depression
by inducing intense physical pain and by putting a loaded gun to
his head. Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions of
sex. 1995.
Collected Stories RC 44489
by Isaac Babel 
read by Ken Kliban
3 cassettes
Fifty-four stories by the noted Russian writer. Includes several
of his semifictional "autobiographical" stories, as well as
selections from Red Cavalry, tales 
of his service in the Red Army in 1920 during Russia's civil war,
and Odessa Stories, a collection of vignettes about Russian
Jewish life. 1994.
The Collected Stories of Evan S. Connell  RC 42624
by Evan S. Connell 
read by Roy Avers
5 cassettes
Short stories composed over a period of fifty years, many of
which are critical of political reactionaries and the American
middle class. The lead story, "Arcturus," depicts the conflicts
and veiled emotions between a husband and his wife's former
suitor at a dinner party. Strong language. 1995.
The Collected Stories of Mavis Gallant  RC 43750
by Mavis Gallant 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
8 cassettes
Selected stories on such themes as life crises, disillusionment,
and the ability to adjust and go on living under a new set of
personal myths. In "The Other Paris," a woman who enters a doomed
marriage on romantic impulse later "reminisces" about a joyful
past that never happened. 1996.
The Collected Stories of William Carlos Williams RC 44040
by William Carlos Williams 
read by David Palmer
3 cassettes
Insightful short stories by a physician-writer, often on medical
themes, about the lives of immigrant and working-class people. In
one vignette, "The Use of Force," a doctor is driven to coercive
measures as he diagnoses a violently resistant child whose life
is at risk. Some strong language. 1996.
Complete Short Stories RC 44510
by Robert Graves 
read by Graeme Malcolm
3 cassettes
Stories by the celebrated British writer on themes both fictional
and autobiographical. In "Interview with a Dead Man," the subject
belies his lifeless condition with animated banter about his
estate and ambitions for the netherworld. 1995.
The Complete Short Stories of Mark Twain RC 44119
by Mark Twain 
read by L.J. Ganser
6 cassettes (Reissue)
Sixty stories filled with folklore and wit that span Twain's
entire writing career and are arranged chronologically by
publishing date from 1865 through 1916. Some entries, like "The
Trials of Simon Erikson" and four other stories from Roughing It
(RC 12437), are fictional yarns extracted from nonfiction works.
Includes an introduction by editor Charles Neider. 1957.
The Continental Op RC 42705
by Dashiell Hammett 
read by Gary Telles
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Seven stories that appeared in the magazine Black Mask during the
twenties. They introduce Continental Op, the fat man from the
Continental Detective Agency (modeled after the Pinkerton Agency
where Hammett once worked) and reflect a world of cruelty and
stealth. Some violence. 1923.
Cow Country RC 44594
by Will James 
read by Jim Zeiger
1 cassette
Eight short stories that capture the hardships, adventures, and
spirit of the American cowboy. The selections tell of wild
mustangs, ornery steers, lonesome drifters, and fancy dudes of
the West in the early 1900s. 1995.
Driving Blind RC 45011
by Ray Bradbury 
read by L.J. Ganser
2 cassettes
Seventeen new and four previously published short stories that
mostly center on seemingly ordinary, everyday events. In the
title story, "Driving Blind," a hooded stranger drives a new car
into town, but it is a new young friend who understands what the
hood really means. Bestseller 1997.
The Ebony Tower RC 43713
by John Fowles 
read by Gordon Gould
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Collection of stories probing physical, emotional, and spiritual
relationships. In the title story, the author, a prose stylist,
relates the visit of a young artist and a critic to the villa of
an aging, expatriate painter. Explicit descriptions of sex and
some strong language. 1974.
Eight Stories RC 44506
by Dylan Thomas 
read by Graeme Malcolm
1 cassette
Eight short stories by the noted Welsh writer and poet: "The End
of the River," "The School for Witches," "The Peaches," "Just
like Little Dogs," "Old Garbo," "One Warm Saturday," "Plenty of
Furniture," and "The Followers." 1954.
End of the Drive RC 45059
by Louis L'Amour 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
2 cassettes
Tales of the untamed West depicting people who face harsh tests
that threaten their way of life and survival. In "Caprock
Rancher," a boy comes to realize his father's courage as the two
join forces to recover their neighbors' lost savings from
outlaws. Violence. Bestseller 1997.
Everlasting Love RC 43918
by Jayne Ann Krentz and others 
read by Mary Woods
2 cassettes
Collection of short stories about love from five romance authors.
In Krentz's story, a young woman in Washington state pretends to
be the fiancée of a private investigator she has hired. In Linda
Miller's tale, set in Montana territory in 1888, a woman's
husband returns after seven years-just as she is planning to
marry again. Explicit descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1995.
A Fisherman of the Inland Sea: Science Fiction Stories RC 43403
by Ursula K. Le Guin 
read by Ted Stoddard
2 cassettes
Eight tales that delve into the relationship between perception
and reality, and explore the "churten" effect, a way of moving
objects and people between distant worlds at the speed of light.
In the title story, a churten researcher is flung backward in
time to face a choice of alternative futures. Some strong
language. 1994.
Flying Home and Other Stories  
RC 43853
by Ralph Ellison 
read by Bob Moore
1 cassette
Thirteen short stories, some never before published, written by
the award-winning African American author between 1937 and 1954.
"In a Strange Country" features an African American sailor who
envies a spirit among the Welsh people that he does not
experience back home. Transients encounter rail-yard thugs in
"Hymie's Bull." Strong language and some descriptions of sex.
1996.
Georgia on My Mind and Other Places  RC 41666
by Charles Sheffield 
read by Gary Telles
3 cassettes
Collection of fourteen science fiction stories covering a wide
range of topics and settings. The title piece is the 1993 Nebula
Award-winning novelette about Charles Babbage's analytical engine
of 1850, the forerunner of the modern computer. Other stories
include "Beyond 
the Golden Road," "Humanity Test," "Destroyer of Worlds,"
"Millennium," "The Fifteenth Station of the Cross," and "Health
Care System." 1995.
The Hills of Homicide RC 41471
by Louis L'Amour 
read by Gary Telles
2 cassettes
The noted western writer presents eight of his "hard-boiled"
detective stories. In the title story, a private eye is sent to
the small western town of Ranagat to clear Blacky Caronna of
wealthy Jack Bitner's murder. Three other stories feature Kip
Morgan, a prize-fighter turned private investigator. L'Amour
includes an author's note with most of the stories. Some strong
language and some violence. 1983.
Journey into Christmas and Other Stories  RC 44446
by Bess Streeter Aldrich 
read by Camille McCurty Ali
1 cassette (Reissue)
A dozen short stories that embody the traditional warmth and
sentimentality of the Christmas season. In addition to the title
story, includes "The Drum Goes Dead," "The Man Who Caught the
Weather," and recollections of an Iowa childhood in "I Remember."
1949.
A Man of Mystery and Other Stories  
RC 44149
by Shiva Naipaul 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
2 cassettes
Eight variously humorous and tragic tales that comment on the
human condition. The title story describes the simple lives of a
shoemaker and his wife until she has their house torn down and
builds another and he lives in his shop and the neighborhood bar.
1984.
The Matisse Stories RC 42478
by A.S. Byatt 
read by Laura Giannarelli
1 cassette
Three novellas by the Booker Prize-
winning author. The stories of seemingly ordinary women in
everyday circumstances, which were inspired by three Matisse
paintings, explore the nature of art and human relationships. The
pain within the lives of these women is tempered by the
kindnesses of those around them. The settings include a hair
salon, the home of two artists, and a Chinese restaurant. 1993.
The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes  
RC 43001
by Arthur Conan Doyle 
read by John Horton
3 cassettes
Follows the Adventures of Sherlock Holmes (RC 17437). Doyle
offers eleven more tales of Holmes and Dr. Watson, including
Holmes's meeting with Moriarty, the Napoleon of crime. In a final
note, Doyle explains Holmes's demise. Includes a chronology of
Doyle's work and an introduction by editor Christopher Roden.
1993.
Mirrorshades: The Cyberpunk Anthology RC 42197
edited by Bruce Sterling 
read by Gary Telles
2 cassettes
Twelve stories of Cyberpunk science fiction, a genre that mixes
high-tech science with streetwise pop culture to create
nightmarish futures. Includes "The Gernsback Continuum" by
William Gibson, "Snake-Eyes" by Tom Maddox, "Rock On" by Pat
Cadigan, "Petra" by Greg Bear, and "Mozart in Mirrorshades" by
Bruce Sterling and Lewis Shiner. Strong language, violence, and
explicit descriptions of sex. 1986.
The Morrow Anthology of Great Western Short Stories RC 44649
edited by Jon Tuska and Vicki Piekarski 
read by Roy Avers
5 cassettes
This collection of twenty-eight western short stories from the
1920s-1990s includes works by renowned writers such as Zane Grey,
Max Brand, Conrad Richter, Alan LeMay, and Cherry Wilson, as well
as contemporary tales by Richard Wheeler, Ernest Haycox, and
Cynthia Haseloff. Some strong language. 1997.
My Gal Sunday RC 43179
by Mary Higgins Clark 
read by Pam Ward
1 cassette
Stories featuring a husband-and-wife team of amateur sleuths.
Henry Britland is a former U.S. president who is married to a
younger congresswoman nicknamed Sunday. Their cases include
finding out who really killed the girlfriend of Henry's secretary
of state. Bestseller 1996.
Nebula Awards 29: SFWA's Choices for the Best Science Fiction and
Fantasy of the Year RC 44096
edited by Pamela Sargent 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes
Includes the 1993 choices of the Science Fiction and Fantasy
Writers of America for best novel, novella, novelette, and short
story. Nonfiction entries include the Rhysling Awards for poetry,
essays on new science fiction and fantasy works, memorials to
deceased authors, and a survey of 1993 movies. Strong language,
violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1995.
Nebula Awards 30: SFWA's Choices for the Best Science Fiction and
Fantasy of the Year RC 43079
edited by Pamela Sargent 
read by James DeLotel
3 cassettes
The year's best stories, poems, and essays in science fiction and
fantasy. In "Seven Views of Olduvai Gorge," alien anthropologists
discover that members of the now-extinct human race had been
slaughtering each other on Earth even before they reached the
stars and wreaked havoc there. Strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 1996.
Nebula Awards 31: SFWA's Choices for the Best Science Fiction and
Fantasy of the Year RC 44618
edited by Pamela Sargent 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
Includes the 1995 Nebula Award winners for novella, novelette,
and short story as well as some of the runner-ups. Also includes
memorials to John Brunner and Roger Zelazny, a tribute to A.E.
Van Vogt, the Rhysling Award winners for poetry, and a list of
films. General information on the Nebula Awards is given in
articles, essays, and appendixes. Some strong language. 1997.
Nothing but You: Love Stories from the New Yorker RC 44363
edited by Roger Angell 
read by Faith Potts
4 cassettes
An anthology of romantic stories by postmodernists, ironists, and
other authors recounting their personal encounters with love. In
"The Diver," a young man accidentally falls into the river. A
kindly Parisian seamstress seduces the hapless fellow as she
helps him change his wet clothes. Descriptions of sex. 1997.
Numbers in the Dark and Other Stories  RC 43455
by Italo Calvino 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
2 cassettes
Thirty-seven tales and fables on such themes as politics, ethics,
and technology. "The Black Sheep" tells of a country populated by
thieves who rob one another every night. This economic system
stays in balance until an honest man arrives. Some stories are
humorous, others are ponderous, but all are thought-provoking.
1995.
The One-Room Schoolhouse: Stories about the Boys RC 40675
by Jim Heynen 
read by Michael Kramer
1 cassette
More than one hundred miniature stories about midwestern boys
growing up on the farm. The stories often bear earthy titles,
such as "Hog Calls" or "One Dead Chicken," about subjects
appropriate to rural life. And the unnamed boys-brothers and
their friends-capture moments of death, cruelty, innocence,
tenderness, mystery, and revelation, but it is "the youngest boy"
who steals the show. 1993.
Our Landlady RC 43370
by L. Frank Baum 
read by Terence Aselford
2 cassettes
A collection of humorous stories written around 1890 about life
in South Dakota. Speaking through his fictional landlady, the
creator of Oz comments on railroads, suffrage, prairie populism,
prohibition, and other issues of moment at the time that state
entered the Union. 1996.
The Rest of Life: Three Novellas  
RC 40704
by Mary Gordon 
read by Laura Giannarelli
2 cassettes
Stories that relate ways women's lives are altered by love. In
"Immaculate Man," a middle-aged woman tells of her passion for a
Catholic priest and her feelings of guilt when he breaks his vow
of celibacy. "Living at Home" details a psychiatrist's love for a
war correspondent who prefers the world's hot spots. And in "The
Rest of Life," an elderly woman returns to her homeland after
years in exile. Strong language and some descriptions of sex.
1993.
The Return of Sherlock Holmes
RC 43002
by Arthur Conan Doyle 
read by John Horton
3 cassettes (Reissue)
Ten years after the fictional death of Sherlock Holmes, Doyle
bows to public pressure and breathes new life into his creation.
Using incidents from his own life, Doyle provides thirteen
adventures for his amateur detective and Holmes's frequently
baffled colleague, Dr. Watson. Includes a chronology of Doyle's
work and an introduction by editor Richard Lancelyn Green. 1993.
Selected Stories RC 43878
by Alice Munro 
read by Mary Kane
5 cassettes
Twenty-eight short stories first published from 1961 through 1994
by the renowned Canadian writer. Lake Huron's small towns and
farms provide the setting for stories that feature elaborate
personalities in seemingly ordinary circumstances. Includes
"Dance of the Happy Shades," "The Beggar Maid," "The Progress of
Love," and "Vandals." 1996.
Seven Gothic Tales RC 42194
by Isak Dinesen 
read by Laura Giannarelli
3 cassettes
These stories' opulent settings heighten the eeriness of the
supernatural forces and almost madness that run throughout. "The
Deluge at Norderney," about a flood in a resort town that forces
a cardinal, a spinster, and two others to take refuge in a
hayloft, is one of the author's best-known stories and
illustrates her powers of observation and description. The life
of the Danish baroness was the basis for the movie Out of Africa.
1934.
Short Circuits: Thirteen Shocking Stories by Outstanding Writers
for Young Adults  RC 43261
edited by Donald R. Gallo 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Tales of terror about teenagers caught 
in precarious situations. In "Ethan Unbound," a boy finds himself
locked in the library with a librarian-witch and must summon
Dracula and other literary figures to his aid. For junior and
senior high readers. 1992.
Short Stories RC 43646
by Langston Hughes 
read by Chuck Young
2 cassettes
Forty-seven short stories by the noted African American author
originally written between 1919 and 1963. The tales, arranged in
chronological order, include those previously uncollected, such
as his first stories (written while in high school) and other
early works published in African American journals. Some strong
language. 1996.
Some Love, Some Pain, Sometime  
RC 43868
by J. California Cooper 
read by Saidah Arrika Ekulona
2 cassettes
Ten stories of women who seek love, contend with the risks of
romance, and eventually find happiness. In the initial story, a
country-bred young woman moves to the city in search of a husband
who will make her feel like a "femme fatale." Strong language and
descriptions of sex. 1995.
Tales from Watership Down RC 43864
by Richard Adams 
read by John Horton
2 cassettes
Twenty-four years after writing Watership Down (RC 35730), Adams
now offers nineteen short stories about the lives of the rabbits
since they defeated General Woundwort. Many of the stories focus
on the hero El-ahriarah, and all deal with the theme of the human
enemy versus the animal. 1996.
Tales of the South Pacific RC 44249
by James A. Michener 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes (Reissue)
Nineteen World War II tales that won the Pulitzer Prize. They
describe the strain and the boredom, the careful planning and
heroic action, the color and beauty of the islands, and all that
made up life during the critical days of the war in the Pacific.
Strong language. 1947.
This Year It Will Be Different and Other Stories: A Christmas
Treasury 
RC 43325
by Maeve Binchy 
read by Michele Schaeffer
1 cassette
Fifteen tales set in England, Ireland, and Australia telling how
family members come to terms with Christmases that circumstances
make "different." In the title story, a mother's listlessness
leads to a change in the way her family observes the holiday. In
another a resentful stepdaughter finds love within her new
family. Bestseller 1996.
Three Doors to Death RC 45281
by Rex Stout 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
Three mysteries written between 1947 and 1949. In "Man Alive,"
Nero Wolfe's investigation of the murder of a man already
declared dead takes him into the world of high fashion. "Omit
Flowers" involves the food industry and a family's covering up
for a murderer. In "Door to Death," a horticulturist finds his
fiancée dead in his hothouse. Some strong language. 1995.
Traveling On into the Light and Other Stories RC 40824
by Martha Brooks 
read by Chuck Young
1 cassette
Eleven stories by the author of Paradise Cafe (RC 33408). In the
title story, a girl visits her father and the man for whom he
left her mother. In "The Kindness of Strangers," an old man
befriends a runaway youth who has been betrayed by his mother.
The final stories form a trilogy about Sidonie and Kieran,
teenagers who have each lost a parent. Some strong language. For
high school and older readers. 1994.
Very Good, Jeeves! RC 44515
by P.G. Wodehouse 
read by George Holmes
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Eleven stories about the resourceful Jeeves, manservant to the
irresponsible Bertie Wooster. In these tales Jeeves extricates
Bertie from overwhelming dilemmas. 1930.
Wanda Hickey's Night of Golden Memories and Other Disasters 
RC 41950
by Jean Shepherd 
read by Michael Kramer
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Shepherd recalls humorous episodes about growing up in the
northern Indiana steel town of Hohman. When the hillbilly Bumpus
family and their 745 dogs move in next door, a stolen Easter ham
results in a Shepherd-Bumpus feud. Later, spiffed-up Jean with
his seven-pound pompadour goes on a disastrous date with a
wealthy classmate. But he manages to top that with a drunken
junior prom fiasco. Strong language. 1971.
The Wedding Dress: Stories from the Dakota Plains RC 43856
by Carrie Young 
read by Catherine Byers
1 cassette
In the title story, Ildri, a seamstress of Norwegian descent, is
asked to model an intricately made wedding dress. Upon leaving
her position, Ildri buys the dress and lends it to a succession
of brides in her homesteading community before finding her own
bittersweet use for it. The collection's other entries are also
peopled with Norwegian Americans on the Dakota plains. Some
strong language. 1992.
West of Dodge: Frontier Stories  
RC 44536
by Louis L'Amour 
read by John Polk
2 cassettes
Fourteen tales of gunfighters, cowhands, and lawmen of the Old
West. In the title story, an itinerant gunfighter rides into
Dodge and learns of the widespread sentiment against the local
marshal. In time marshal and gunslinger join forces and undo a
plot to take over the town. 1996.
While the Messiah Tarries: Stories  
RC 42482
by Melvin Jules Bukiet 
read by Ray Hagen
2 cassettes
Nine stories, at times magical or comic and at other times
mundane or tragic, describing the lives of Jews in America. In
"Gematria," a woman's visit to New York's diamond district leaves
the jeweler thinking about gematria, the transliteration of names
and numbers, and about his own death. In "The Golden Calf and the
Red Heifer," Kleinberg the butcher tries to hide the facts that
he is a vegetarian and that his knife is not kosher. 1995.
Women in Their Beds: New and Selected Stories RC 43699
by Gina Berriault 
read by Annie Wauters
3 cassettes
Short stories that depict the human condition through a variety
of characters in real-life situations. In one story, a librarian
becomes suspicious of a homeless man who wants him to interpret a
poem. The librarian later realizes that the man was simply
seeking guidance for his life. 1996.
Spies and Espionage
Charity RC 44125
by Len Deighton 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
This sequel to Hope (RC 44118) finds British agent Bernard Samson
inquiring into the mysterious death of his sister-in-law, which
occurred at the time his spy-wife was brought back from East
Germany. Samson overcomes official resistance to his inquiry and
uncovers a plot that causes him to doubt the system he serves.
1996.
Death Throes RC 43495
by Clive Egleton 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
In this sequel to A Killing in Moscow 
(RC 39539), Her Majesty's agent Peter Ashton is in Bulgaria on
the trail of a mysterious Russian agent code-named Valentin. When
a prominent neo-Nazi is shot in Germany and the assassin is
linked to Valentin, Ashton goes undercover on a perilous mission
to Moscow. Violence and some strong language. 1994.
Icon RC 43301
by Frederick Forsyth 
read by Ted Stoddard
4 cassettes
In 1999 Igor Komarov seems poised to become president of a Russia
on the brink of anarchy. Then a copy of his racist and fascist
ideology-the "Black Manifesto" -falls into foreign hands. Ex-CIA
agent Jason Monk is dispatched to infiltrate Russia, spread word
of the document's existence, and prevent Komarov from being
elected. Some strong language. 1996.
The Matarese Countdown RC 45152
by Robert Ludlum 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
4 cassettes
Sequel to The Matarese Circle (RC 13413). A pattern of worldwide
killings and business takeovers suggests a conspiracy of the
highest order. Retired CIA agent Brandon Scofield is recalled to
duty, bringing his unique knowledge to bear against an insidious
international cartel. Strong language and violence. Bestseller
1997.
Out of Control RC 42629
by G. Gordon Liddy 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes (Reissue)
The former FBI agent and Watergate conspirator offers a novel of
political intrigue set in the world of high finance. In an
attempt to expose suspected KGB agent Ballinger, the CIA turns to
Rick Rand, once of CIA and now a successful financier, who
allegedly has connections to Mafia and Chinese Tong crime
families. Rand plans a tough scheme. Strong language. 1979.
The Patriot RC 43084
by Piers Paul Read 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
2 cassettes
Francesca McDermott is an American art scholar hired to organize
an exhibition of Russian experimental "decadent" art in unified
Berlin. Assisting her is Andrei Serotkin, a devoted Marxist and
former KGB agent, who plans to hijack the valuable paintings and
hold them for ransom in a bold attempt to fund the bankrupt
Communist Party. Some strong language and some descriptions of
sex. 1995.
The Riddle of the Sands: A Record of Secret Service RC 45072
by Erskine Childers 
read by Jim Zeiger
3 cassettes
Bestseller, first published in 1903, combines adventure at sea
with intrigue. The Baltic vacation of two friends aboard the
yacht Dulcibella is disrupted by the discovery of a German plan
to invade their British homeland. Carefully details the men's
achievements in seamanship and espionage. 1903.
Sleeper Spy RC 42851
by William Safire 
read by Chuck Benson
3 cassettes
The cold war is past and the Russian government has lost track of
a sleeper agent the KGB long ago placed in the U.S. to invest a
fortune in capital markets. Not only is cash-strapped Moscow out
to recover the billions invested, but so is a veteran American
newsman with an ingenious plan to lure the sleeper into the open.
1995.
The Tailor of Panama RC 43208
by John Le Carré 
read by Gary Telles
3 cassettes
The imminent takeover of the Panama Canal by Panama prompts
British intelligence to recruit Harry Pendel, tailor to 
the Panamanian president. For personal reasons, Harry isn't above
tailoring his reports to suit his British handlers, heedless of
the consequences for world order. Strong language. Bestseller
1996.
The Unlikely Spy RC 44315
by Daniel Silva 
read by Patricia Kilgarriff
4 cassettes
History professor and Winston Churchill confidant Alfred Vicary
is enjoying success as head of England's counterintelligence unit
during World War II. On the eve of the Normandy invasion, he
learns that a Nazi "sleeper" spy has been activated in London to
discover the location of the planned D-Day campaign. Some strong
language and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Sports
Chance RC 40993
by Steve Shilstone 
read by Larry Shapiro
1 cassette
An "oral biography" of fictitious Hall 
of Fame shortstop Chance Caine. The unnamed narrator admits that
he lies to improve a story, then proceeds to chatter away about
Caine's career, his poems and diaries, life in general, and
baseball in particular. Some strong language. 1996.
Ironman RC 42246
by Chris Crutcher 
read by John Lescault
2 cassettes
After Bo Brewster's anger at the coach gets him thrown off the
high school football team, he begins training in earnest 
for a triathalon. Another run-in with the coach gets Bo placed in
an anger management class. Surprised at enjoying the group, Bo
begins learning truths about his troubled relationship with his
father, and by triathalon time the group members have become his
training team. Some strong language. For junior and senior high
readers. 1995.
Slot Machine RC 43380
by Chris Lynch 
read by Terence Aselford
1 cassette
Elvin, his two best friends, and other incoming male freshmen of
a Christian high school spend three weeks at summer camp. The
goal is to find an athletic slot for each boy. Unfortunately, as
overweight Elvin sarcastically explains in letters to his mother,
he's not the athletic type. Some strong language. For junior and
senior high readers. 1995.
The Veracruz Blues RC 43747
by Mark Winegardner 
read by Robert Sams
2 cassettes
A rollicking tale based on events of 1946, when wealthy Jorge
Pasquel lured disaffected players from American baseball to the
fully integrated Mexican League. Relates the mixed fortunes of
Pasquel's talented Veracruz team, whose eventual decline proves
the value of teamwork. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
1996.
Winter Games RC 44128
by John Feinstein 
read by Christopher Hurt
2 cassettes
Rytis Buzelis, a Lithuanian-born basketball star, is wooed by
college coaches across the country. When journalist Bobby
Kelleher finds the body of an old friend and coach who had been
vying to sign Buzelis, Kelleher ventures into the sinister world
of big-money sports to find the killer. Strong language. 1995.
Suspense
Abuse of Power RC 45108
by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg 
read by Carol Dines
3 cassettes
Policewoman Rachel Simmons witnesses a boy's death as a result of
another officer's abuse of authority. Simmons's decision to break
the blue code of silence pits her against colleagues and makes
her a target of their reprisal. Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Airframe RC 43760
by Michael Crichton 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
The flight of a Norton jet from Hong Kong to Denver ends badly:
three dead and more than fifty others injured. Casey Singleton,
Norton's quality assurance rep, must determine what caused the
mid-air accident before the press crucifies the company and a
huge contract is jeopardized. Strong language. Bestseller 1996.
Almost Adam RC 44171
by Petru Popescu 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
4 cassettes
On a remote savanna in Kenya, young scientist Ken Lauder
discovers and befriends a protohuman boy. When the two become the
prey of conspirators, they flee into a violent, primal world that
has escaped evolution for millions of years. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
Amber Beach RC 45025
by Elizabeth Lowell 
read by Michele Schaeffer
2 cassettes
Kyle Donovan and a shipment of amber, including a panel from the
Russian czar's Amber Room, are missing. His sister, Honor, can't
believe Kyle is guilty. In an effort to locate the amber and
clear Kyle, Honor hires Jake Mallory. Each has a reason for
finding Kyle, but trusting each other becomes difficult when
romance gets in the way. Some strong language and some explicit
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Angel RC 44077
by Nicholas Guild 
read by Ray Foushee
3 cassettes
His father's death leaves lawyer James Kincaid alone with the
family law practice. Among his father's effects, he finds a list
of names with links to a series of ongoing murders. Accepting his
inherited guilt, Kincaid sets out to find the killer and stop the
bloodshed. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex.
1995.
The Best Laid Plans RC 44998
by Sidney Sheldon 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Ad executive Leslie Stewart was once engaged to a politician from
Kentucky, Oliver Russell. After he jilts her, Leslie is
determined to ruin Oliver's life. Becoming a publisher brings her
power and wealth, so when Oliver is eventually elected president,
she tries to link him to the deaths of several of his past
lovers. Some strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Black Light RC 43278
by Stephen Hunter 
read by Fred Major
3 cassettes
Bob Lee Swagger, a former Marine sniper in Vietnam, joins a young
journalist in search of the killer of Swagger's father, an
Arkansas highway patrolman. It soon becomes clear that powerful
people don't want the truth uncovered, and Swagger must use every
trick and weapon in his arsenal just to survive. Strong language.
1996.
Black Lightning RC 44052
by John Saul 
read by Ray Foushee
3 cassettes
Journalist Anne Jeffers is partially responsible for serial
killer Richard Kraven's execution. When Kraven dies, Jeffers's
husband has a near-fatal heart attack and then begins acting
oddly. Meanwhile a copycat killer tries to gain the same
notoriety as Kraven. Strong language, violence, and explicit
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1995.
Blackwater RC 43630
by Kerstin Ekman 
read by Catherine Byers
3 cassettes
Annie Raft and her six-year-old daughter, Mia, stumble upon two
corpses in the forests of northern Sweden. Eighteen years later,
Annie recognizes Mia's lover as the boy she had seen fleeing the
murder scene of the unsolved crime. Some strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 1996.
Blind Spot RC 44660
by Adam Barrow 
read by Barry Bernson
2 cassettes
Marshall Quinn is dozing at the Chicago planetarium when his
three-year-old son, Jeff, is snatched from the seat beside him.
As the kidnappers complete an "adoption" with an unsuspecting
couple, Marshall gives up on police help and frantically searches
for the boy himself. Strong language and some violence. 1997.
The Blood of the Lamb RC 43399
by Thomas F. Monteleone 
read by Gregory Gorton
3 cassettes
A young parish priest with supernatural powers is summoned to the
Vatican and informed that he was cloned from blood found on the
Shroud of Turin. The new Messiah uses his powers to preach an
ecumenical faith and becomes a target of the religious
establishment. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of
sex. 1992.
Blown Away RC 44831
by David Wiltse 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
FBI agent John Becker is assigned to track down Spring, the man
taking credit for a series of bombings in New York. Meanwhile,
other New Yorkers have figured out who Spring is and want in on
his demands on the city. Strong language, violence, and some
descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Blue Wall RC 44448
by Kenneth Abel 
read by Christopher Walker
2 cassettes
Already reeling from a broken marriage, NYPD detective Dave Moser
probes a brutal murder involving a crime family. As he presses
the case, Moser runs afoul of the mob, the department, and a
federal sting of city police corruption. Strong language and
violence. 1996.
The Campaign RC 43351
by Marilyn Tucker Quayle and 
Nancy Tucker Northcott 
read by L.J. Ganser
4 cassettes
Conservative black senator Bob Grant becomes the prime suspect
when a reporter who had been critical of Grant is murdered. Grant
begins his own investigation to clear his name and in so doing,
uncovers official corruption and conspiracy at the highest levels
of power. 1996.
Chance RC 43559
by Robert B. Parker 
read by Ray Foushee
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Thin Air (RC 40561), a Mafia boss asks Spenser
and his sidekick, Hawk, to locate his missing son-in-law. The two
sleuths begin an odyssey through the seamy streets of Las Vegas
and find more than a missing person as they uncover larceny,
homicide, and a plot to control gangland Boston. Strong language.
1996.
Cradle of Splendor RC 43404
by Patricia Anthony 
read by Ilona Dulaski
2 cassettes
In this near-future tale, Brazil is on the verge of becoming a
world power in space. When a troubled launch inexplicably
achieves orbit, the United States thinks Brazil has seized a UFO
and plans to invade. As agents uncover the mystery, the ensuing
turmoil leads to tragedy. Strong language and descriptions of
sex. 1996.
Criminals RC 45075
by Margot Livesey 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
En route to visit his sister Mollie in Scotland, London banker
Ewan Munro finds an abandoned baby, whom he carries along. Munro
is unaware that the child has been stolen from her mother and
that the infant's father, intent on extortion, is trailing him.
Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1995.
The Cry of the Halidon RC 44191
by Robert Ludlum 
read by Chuck Benson
3 cassettes
A team of scientists, hired to conduct a geophysical survey on a
Caribbean island, is embroiled in a conspiracy to establish a
multinational criminal enterprise. Members of the team encounter
interference by local residents and British Intelligence as they
pursue professional and romantic interests. Violence, some strong
language, and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1974.
Danger Zones RC 44540
by Sally Beauman 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
4 cassettes
The disappearance of two teenage girls in rural England prompts
reporter Rowland McGuire to investigate. His probe leads him into
the sordid world of high fashion to uncover a drug conspiracy
involving the world's premier couturier. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Dark Road Home RC 44094
by Karen Harper 
read by Ann Hodapp
2 cassettes
To escape a stalker, Ohio attorney Brooke Benton retreats to an
Amish community. Her new Amish neighbor, Daniel Brand, has
returned from a stint in the outside world. The two are thrown
together when Daniel's niece is killed by a hit-and-run driver,
and Brooke, fearing she was the target, insists on investigating.
Some violence and some descriptions of sex. 1996.
Dark Specter RC 44598
by Michael Dibdin 
read by Bob Askey
3 cassettes
When several murders around the country show a similar pattern, a
Seattle detective begins to gather clues. At the same time, a
professor sets out to rescue his abducted son. The trails lead to
the island compound of a fanatical cult leader who directed the
murders as rites of initiation. Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. 1995.
Double Helix RC 44820
by Sigmund Brouwer 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
On his way to his New Mexico home, Slater Ellis almost runs over
a naked boy. Meanwhile, in Florida, Paige Stephens eavesdrops on
a frightening conversation just before her husband kills himself.
As Slater searches for the boy and Paige tries to understand her
husband's death, they each draw closer to discovering a macabre
medical research project. Violence. 1995.
The Enemy Within RC 43067
by Larry Bond 
read by Bruce Huntey
3 cassettes
A foreign terrorist campaign of bombings and massacres across the
United States incites widespread civil turmoil and paralyzes the
nation. As leaders hunker down to contain the disaster, FBI and
Delta Force agents desperately pursue the terrorists. Strong
language and violence. 1996.
Extreme Denial RC 43611
by David Morrell 
read by Nick Sullivan
3 cassettes
Antiterrorist agent Steve Decker took the fall for a botched
covert operation in Rome and has retired to New Mexico. Then he
meets gorgeous widow Beth Dwyer and disaster strikes. Decker's
home is attacked and an explosion rocks Beth's. The stakes are
high as Decker matches wits with his violent enemies. Strong
language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1996.
Eye of the Beholder RC 44631
by Brian Lysaght 
read by Chuck Benson
3 cassettes
When fugitive financier Robert Vargo returns covertly to the U.S.
to resume his criminal ways, U.S. Attorney Julie Beck vows to
bring him down. Julie recruits the one man who can find Vargo-her
ex-lover whom she put behind bars. Together they pursue the
vicious criminal. Strong language and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Fat Tuesday RC 44766
by Sandra Brown 
read by Carole Jordan Stewart
3 cassettes
Lieutenant Burke Basile knew his partner's killer would be
acquitted, but he didn't expect his own life to fall apart as a
result. Now all he can think about is getting back at Pinkie
Duvall, the murderer's defense attorney. Pinkie has one weakness
-his wife Remy, and Burke's kidnapping of Remy sets off a
confrontation that ends in the middle of Mardi Gras. Strong
language and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Father and Son RC 44664
by Larry Brown 
read by Fred Major
2 cassettes
After serving a prison term for homicide, Glen Davis returns to
his Mississippi hometown looking to settle some old wrongs. When
Davis finds that his girlfriend has taken up with the sheriff who
sent him to prison, Davis commits a vile act of revenge that
turns fatal. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex.
1996.
Final Refuge: A Novel of Eco-Terrorism  RC 43082
by James L. Haley 
read by Gary Tipton
2 cassettes
Eric Jackson's love and life's work, his Houston wildlife
preserve, has cost him his marriage, and now two beloved black
rhinos have been killed by poachers. Learning that the thieves
plan to raid his refuge for more rare-animal loot, Eric confronts
the armed poachers and defends his animals. Some strong language.
1994.
Flood Tide RC 45276
by Clive Cussler 
read by Bob Askey
4 cassettes
In the year 2000 Dirk Pitt of the National Underwater and Marine
Agency is working with immigration officials to stop the
smuggling of Chinese workers into the United States. Gangster Qin
Shang has even built a port in Louisiana to unload the illegals.
Pitt is also investigating a rumor of a shipwrecked Chinese
vessel bearing a load of treasure. Some violence and some strong
language. Bestseller 1997.
Flower Net RC 45063
by Lisa See 
read by Gabriella Cavallero
3 cassettes
The son of the American ambassador is found dead in Beijing, and
the son of a Chinese leader is found dead in the U.S. Chinese
inspector Liu Hulan and assistant U.S. attorney David Stark are
assigned to investigate a possible connection. To further
complicate matters, Hulan and Stark were once lovers. Violence,
strong language, and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Games of the Hangman RC 42613
by Victor O'Reilly 
read by Ray Foushee
4 cassettes
A fast-moving story of international terrorism. War photographer
Hugo Fitzduane discovers a boy's body hanging from a tree on
Fitzduane's own property, an apparent suicide. But when the body
of a slain terrorist is found with the same tattoo that marked
the hanged boy, the chase begins. Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. 1991.
Gideon's Torch RC 44053
by Charles Colson and Ellen Vaughn 
read by John Polk
4 cassettes
When an abortion-clinic doctor is murdered, a federal crackdown
is mounted to find the killer. Then a protest group gets a
shocking abortion video on the evening news, terrorists bomb a
fetal research center, and the president declares martial law.
Violence. 1995.
Grand Jury RC 43847
by Philip Friedman 
read by John Stratton
5 cassettes
In this sequel to Inadmissable Evidence (RC 36253), grand juror
Susan Linwood senses something odd about the government's drug
case against an elderly Chinese couple. Herself of Chinese
descent, Linwood enlists the help of another juror to probe the
matter privately. What they uncover imperils their very lives.
Descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
The Green Mile: A Novel in Six Parts  RC 44564
by Stephen King 
read by Ray Foushee
3 cassettes
Death-row supervisor Paul Edgecombe thinks back to 1932 when John
Coffey is brought to the penitentiary and placed on the "Green
Mile." Coffey is accused of the rape and murder of twin
nine-year-old girls. But Coffey seems to be an unusual kind of
human being. Strong language and violence. Bestseller 1996.
Harvest RC 43323
by Tess Gerritsen 
read by Michele Schaeffer
3 cassettes
Surgical resident Abby DiMatteo is excited to be considered for
the prestigious cardiac transplant team. But when she must oppose
her colleagues' plan 
to divert a transplant from a dying seventeen-year-old to a
billionaire's wife, she is discredited. As she fights to clear
her name, she is shocked at what she learns. Strong language and
violence. 1996.
The Heart of Danger RC 44349
by Gerald Seymour 
read by Graeme Malcolm
3 cassettes
The body of a young British woman is found in a mass grave in
war-torn Bosnia. On the case is former British agent Bill Penn,
whose search focuses on a powerful Serbian warlord. Penn makes a
daring attempt to capture the culprit and bring him to justice
for war crimes. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of
sex. 1995.
Heart of War RC 45089
by Lucian K. Truscott 
read by Chuck Benson
3 cassettes
When a female lieutenant is murdered at Fort Benning, army staff
attorney Kara Guidry follows a trail of clues that leads to the
base commander. Then a second young woman is killed, and Guidry
plunges into a morass of political intrigue and scandal. Strong
language, violence, and descriptions of sex. 1997.
High Flight RC 43567
by David Hagberg 
read by Roy Avers
5 cassettes
Guerin Airline Company hires ex-CIA officer Kirk McGarvey to
investigate a spate of mysterious accidents. With the aid of his
former Russian foes, Kirk uncovers a Japanese plot to sabotage
U.S. planes and depress Guerin stocks. When U.S. terrorists
exploit the plot for their own purposes, international turmoil
ensues. Strong language. 1995.
Hope RC 44118
by Len Deighton 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Faith (RC 40594), British agent Bernard Samson
and his inept boss are in Poland tracking Samson's missing
brother-in-law, George Kosinski, when macabre evidence of his
demise causes them to abort their search. Kosinski reappears in
Britain, and Samson is recalled from Berlin to resolve the
matter. 1995.
Hostile Witness RC 42592
by William Lashner 
read by Ray Foushee
4 cassettes
Fresh out of law school, Victor Carl joined with two friends to
form their own firm. But after six years, their future is bleak.
Then well-known Philadelphia lawyer William Prescott offers Carl
the opportunity of a lifetime. It sounds too good to be true-and
it is. Explicit descriptions of sex, strong language, and some
violence. 1995.
Illusions RC 44288
by Katherine Stone 
read by Michele Schaeffer
2 cassettes
Just before losing consciousness, a woman hears the doctor say
there is a second baby. But when she wakes, she is told that
child has died. Perhaps it would have been better for Chase
Carlton, the boy declared dead, if he actually had died. The
miserable years he spends in an orphanage leave their mark. And
now the inner voice that has led him through tragedy is calling
him to risk his life once more. Some strong language and some
descriptions of sex. 1994.
Indian Killer RC 44550
by Sherman Alexie 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
Adopted as an infant by white parents, John Smith grows up
dispossessed of his Native American heritage and identity. When
an elusive serial killer stalks and scalps white men around
Seattle, the focus falls on Smith as a prime suspect. Strong
language, violence, and descriptions of sex. 1996.
The Insult RC 43935
by Rupert Thomson 
read by Jim Zeiger
3 cassettes
Martin Blom is blinded by a stray bullet in a parking lot. When
he discovers that he has been gifted with night vision, he sets
out on a nocturnal urban odyssey. Blom's journey leads to a
startling discovery of his own past in a remote mountain village.
Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Karma RC 44214
by Mitchell Smith 
read by Fred Major
3 cassettes
When architect Evan Scott watches a female construction worker
plunge seventy stories from a skyscraper frame, he realizes it
was no accident. His investigation threatens powerful interests
on both sides of the law and leads him on a perilous mission of
vengeance. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex.
1994.
The Last Don RC 43299
by Mario Puzo 
read by Ed Blake
3 cassettes
On the day of a family double-christening in 1965, Mafia don
Clericuzio decides 
to spare his progeny from "our sins" 
by shifting to legitimate investments. Twenty-five years later,
the male cousins who shared the christening continue to struggle
with the sins of their forebears. Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1996.
The List RC 44207
by Steve Martini 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
3 cassettes
Lawyer-turned-novelist Abby Chandlis has penned a sure
bestseller, but the market for women authors is tight. When 
she attributes authorship to a cute male model, things go awry
and her scam turns sour-then lethal. Strong language, violence,
and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Long after Midnight RC 44678
by Iris Johansen 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Scientist Kate Denby is on the verge of a dramatic discovery.
Noah Smith, a geneticist, is also close to a major breakthrough
in his research, but needs Kate to work with him. So far Kate has
refused because she wants to keep life as normal as possible for
her son since her divorce. But then bombs start exploding. Strong
language and some violence. 1997.
Los Alamos RC 44930
by Joseph Kanon 
read by John Polk
3 cassettes
Toward the end of World War II, the murder of a Manhattan Project
security officer calls agent Michael Connolly to a town that
doesn't officially exist. He must penetrate the closed ranks of
residents to discover whether the death is related to espionage
or to the victim's homosexual lifestyle. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. Bestseller 1997.
Lovers and Liars RC 44182
by Sally Beauman 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
5 cassettes
London reporter Gini Hunter is surprised to be assigned a story
with French photojournalist Pascal Lamartine, the man she had
loved at fifteen. The assignment is to verify a tip that the U.S.
ambassador has unusual sex habits. What Gini and Pascal don't
realize is that the odd anonymous packages they receive the day
they get the job are clues that they are pawns in a carefully
orchestrated game. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of
sex. 1994.
The Maze RC 44814
by Catherine Coulter 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
FBI Agent Lacey Sherlock gave up her goal of becoming a concert
pianist seven years ago when her sister Belinda was murdered by a
serial killer. Now a member of Dillon Savich's special FBI unit,
Lacey can spend her free time investigating her sister's case.
Strong language, violence, and some descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
Meg: A Novel of Deep Terror RC 44838
by Steve Alten 
read by Ray Foushee
2 cassettes
Professor Jonas Taylor theorizes that the Carcharodon megalodon
(Meg), a great white shark that thrived seventy million years ago
and could devour a Tyrannosaurus rex, may exist beneath the sea.
When his research causes Meg to emerge, Taylor is unprepared to
handle her or her young. Some violence and some strong language.
1997.
Mirage RC 44020
by F. Paul Wilson and 
Matthew J. Costello 
read by Nona Pipes
2 cassettes
Medical scientist Julie Gordon has pioneered a computer scanner
that visually records memories from a patient's brain. When her
twin sister, Sam, falls into a coma, Julie employs the device to
explore Sam's mindscape and relives the emotional traumas of
their childhood. Violence and descriptions of sex. Bestseller
1996.
The Monkey House RC 44350
by John Fullerton 
read by Richard Davidson
2 cassettes
In strife-torn Sarajevo, police find the body of a murdered woman
who had been a police informer. When the evidence leads to a
local crime boss, police superintendent Rosso seeks the aid of an
American journalist to finger the thug. Their joint effort
triggers an international incident. Strong language, violence,
and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Mortal Fear RC 44276
by Greg Iles 
read by Christopher Walker
4 cassettes
When author Karin Wheat is murdered, Harper Cole calls the
police. Karin was a participant in the sexually explicit online
service that Harper helps operate. He suspects that four other
clients who mysteriously stopped participating may also have met
gruesome ends. And he thinks he knows who did it. Strong
language, violence, and explicit descriptions of sex. 1997.
Mount Dragon RC 43919
by Douglas Preston and Lincoln Child 
read by Jim Zeiger
3 cassettes
Genetic scientist Guy Carson's assignment at the elite Mount
Dragon biomedical lab in New Mexico is to find a permanent cure
for the flu by altering human DNA. But his discoveries take a
tragic turn, putting the whole world at horrifying risk. Strong
language and descriptions of sex. 1996.
Night Passage RC 44848
by Robert B. Parker 
read by Michael Stanton
2 cassettes
Jesse Stone is a thirty-five-year-old washout from the L.A.P.D.
homicide unit. Recently divorced, alcoholic Stone accepts a job
in a small town in Massachusetts. He soon finds himself in the
middle of white supremacists, the mob from Boston, and local
misconduct. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1997.
Nightmare, with Angel RC 44176
by Stephen Gallagher 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
3 cassettes
Eleven-year-old Marianne Cadogan is not sure why she and her
father fled Germany for England, leaving her mother behind.
Marianne spends much of her time on the beach, where one day she
is saved from drowning by loner Ryan O'Donnell. Much to Ryan's
horror, the girl insists on being friends, unaware of his
sinister background. Strong language and some violence. 1992.
The Partner RC 43685
by John Grisham 
read by Steven Carpenter
2 cassettes
Four years ago, attorney Patrick Lanigan faked his own death and
ran away with ninety million dollars belonging to his partners
and a client. Now he's been found, tortured, sued by numerous
parties including his wife, and charged with murder. Strong
language and violence. Bestseller 1997.
The Passage RC 43815
by David Poyer 
read by Fred Major
4 cassettes
Lieutenant Dan Lenson boards a destroyer for its shakedown cruise
in the Caribbean. As he works to correct the ship's advanced
electronic systems, he finds that greater problems plague his new
command. Lenson's limits are tested as he rescues Cuban refugees
from a stormy sea and confronts a mutinous crew. Strong language
and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Payback RC 44272
by Thomas Kelly 
read by Robert Sams
3 cassettes
As an enforcer for the Irish mob in New York City, former boxer
Paddy Adare lives well by extorting the building trade. His kid
brother, a law student, comes into the line of fire when Paddy is
ordered to break the construction workers' union. Paddy's
loyalties are split in the deadly conflict that erupts. Strong
language and violence. Bestseller 1997.
A Place to Hide RC 43384
by Robert Westall 
read by Vanessa Maroney
2 cassettes
Eighteen-year-old Lucy King's father tells her she must go into
hiding because he is about to blow the whistle on the English
government. Dressed in her late mother's posh clothes, Lucy
flees, assumes a new identity as an antiques dealer, and waits in
terror to hear what will happen to her father. Some strong
language. For junior and senior high readers. 1994.
The Presence RC 44836
by John Saul 
read by Dani Carr
2 cassettes
Anthropologist Katharine Sundquist brings her teenage son to
Hawaii, where she plans to study some ancient hominid remains.
While swimming, the boy is horribly transformed by a mysterious
substance, and he becomes the unwilling subject of a biological
experiment. Violence. Bestseller 1997.
The President's Daughter RC 44760
by Jack Higgins 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
In 1969 Jake Cazalet has a one-night affair with a countess he
rescues in Vietnam. Years later, he learns he has a daughter. Now
in 1997, Jake is president of the United States, and his daughter
is kidnapped by terrorists. Cazalet has ten days to meet their
demands or his daughter will die. Strong language and some
violence. Bestseller 1997.
The President's Mother RC 43528
by Gloria Whelan 
read by June Carter
2 cassettes
In the year 2002, president Robert Lange launches a costly
defense buildup in the face of foreign threats. Strapped for
funds, Lange proposes draconian health-care cutbacks, which his
mother bitterly opposes. When she threatens to divulge a secret
that could wreck her son's career, the president moves to silence
her. 1996.
The Prestige RC 44253
by Christopher Priest 
read by David Palmer
3 cassettes
In 1878, a renowned magician interrupts 
a competitor's seance to expose it as a fraud. The incident turns
tragic, with each man vowing to destroy the other. Their rivalry
continues throughout their careers, ultimately leading to a
catastrophe that resounds for generations. Violence. James Tait
Black Award for Best Novel. 1995.
Pretend You Don't See Her RC 44529
by Mary Higgins Clark 
read by Carol Dines
2 cassettes
Lacey Farrell, a Manhattan real estate agent, is forced to assume
a new identity when she accidentally witnesses the murder of a
woman whose daughter had recently died in an apparent accident.
The woman's dying act is to give Lacey her daughter's
journal-which she photocopies before giving it to the police.
Bestseller 1997.
Retribution RC 43607
by Michael Grant 
read by L.J. Ganser
2 cassettes
After a series of personal setbacks, rogue cop Michael Devlin
quits the NYPD for a "plum" job as security director at a New
York City office tower. He soon discovers that a killer is
targeting company executives, the building is subject to
sabotage, and he must match wits with a world-class assassin.
Strong language and violence. 1995.
Rules of the Hunt RC 43065
by Victor O'Reilly 
read by Ray Foushee
3 cassettes
In this sequel to Games of the Hangman (RC 42613) Irish
ex-soldier Hugo Fitzduane and his son are fiercely attacked by
Japanese terrorists avenging their leader's death. Fitzduane
recovers from his wounds and begins a relentless hunt for the
attackers on their own turf. Strong language, violence, and
descriptions of sex. 1995.
The Senator's Daughter RC 44461
by Victoria Gotti 
read by Barbara Pinolini
2 cassettes
Following the violent murder of Boston union boss Joseph Sessio,
attorney Taylor Brooke is picked to defend the accused, a young
black man. Brooke learns that her client is being railroaded by
the district attorney. On the way to uncovering the real killer,
Brooke herself becomes the next target. Strong language and
violence. 1997.
The Set-Up RC 45077
by Paul Erdman 
read by Chuck Benson
3 cassettes
Charles Black, retired chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, is
abruptly arrested by Swiss police for securities fraud.
Frustrated in her attempts to obtain diplomatic assistance,
Black's wife joins forces with a shadowy stranger and uncovers an
international conspiracy in which Black is a hapless victim.
1997.
The Shadow Man RC 44369
by John Katzenbach 
read by Gregory Gorton
3 cassettes
When his neighbor, a Holocaust survivor, is found murdered,
retired Miami detective Simon Winter joins the investigation and
tracks the elusive Shadow Man, who betrayed his own people during
the war and now stalks them in their retirement. Strong language,
violence, and descriptions of sex. 1995.
Shock Wave RC 43317
by Clive Cussler 
read by Bob Askey
4 cassettes
In the 1850s, a male and a female prisoner survive a shipwreck
and find diamonds on an island. In the year 2000, their
descendant Arthur Dorsett plans to topple the diamond market with
a flood of gems. His mining techniques are causing an "acoustic
plague" that kills animals and humans. Investigating these odd
deaths, Dirk Pitt meets Arthur's daughter Maeve, who is quite
different from her father. Violence and some strong language.
Bestseller 1996.
Silent Night RC 44421
by Mary Higgins Clark 
read by Barbara Pinolini
1 cassette
The Dornan family is in New York City on Christmas Eve because
Tom Dornan has just had surgery for leukemia. When his wife drops
her wallet, Cally Hunter, desperate for Christmas money, picks it
up. Young Brian Dornan follows her, because inside the wallet is
a recuperative St. Christopher medal for his dad. But Cally's
brother, an escaped convict, is waiting in her apartment, and he
has plans for the money and for Brian. Some strong language.
1995.
Sole Survivor RC 44144
by Dean Koontz 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
Los Angeles journalist Joe Carpenter is devastated by the loss of
his wife and two daughters, who died in a plane crash. A year
later, Carpenter is shocked to meet a mysterious woman who claims
to have been on that flight. She appears to bring great joy to
the crash victims' loved ones, but then they each inexplicably
kill themselves. Violence. Bestseller 1997.
Swamp RC 40925
by Peter Tremayne 
read by Phil Regensdorf
2 cassettes
Two amateur hunters plan to illegally shoot a manatee in the
Florida Everglades National Park. Instead they kill a
monstrous-looking biped that was swimming in the swamp.
Immediately an even larger monster emerges from the water and
attacks them. Meanwhile two fugitives and their hostage make
their way to the same swamp, ironically thinking it a safe place.
Strong language and violence. 1985.
Table for Five RC 44326
by Sean Hardie 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
When appealing Julia Cornwall offers British freelance television
producer Charlie Kavanagh big bucks to produce a rush show on the
Israeli foreign minister, Charlie is amazed. After Julia
introduces Charlie to the portly American funding the project,
Charlie boards his plane, blissfully unaware that not only is the
fat man just an actor, but he's now a dead actor. Strong
language, explicit descriptions of sex, and some violence. 1991.
The Takeover RC 44685
by Stephen W. Frey 
read by Bob Askey
3 cassettes
Once a partner at one of Wall Street's top investment-banking
firms, Andrew Falcon takes a decidedly less lucrative job at a
commercial bank after his own financial venture fails. Desperate
for money, he agrees to mastermind the hostile,
five-million-dollar takeover of a chemical company. Some strong
language and some descriptions of sex. 1995.
A Thin Dark Line RC 44208
by Tami Hoag 
read by Mitzi Friedlander
4 cassettes
When a murder prosecution is vitiated by an officer's failure to
list key evidence on a search warrant, an irate detective decides
to take the law into his own hands. Deputy Annie Broussard joins
forces with the rogue detective in tracking the elusive killer.
Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex. Bestseller
1997.
Tom Clancy's Op-Center: Acts of War  RC 45009
by Tom Clancy and Steve Pieczenik 
read by Ed Blake
3 cassettes
In a scheme to foment war involving world powers in the Middle
East, Kurdish terrorists target a critical dam in Turkey. The
threat is heightened when the rebels seize the high-tech regional
operations center that has been keeping them under surveillance.
Strong language and violence. Bestseller 1997.
Tom Clancy's Power Plays: Politika  
RC 45253
by Tom Clancy and Martin Greenberg 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
In 1999 Russian president Boris Yeltsin dies, plunging the
federation into chaos. American assistance is forthcoming until
the U.S. experiences a terrorist attack that seems to be of
Russian origin. Meanwhile, Roger Gordian, head of a U.S.
corporation with interests in Kaliningrad, gets involved. Some
violence and some strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Total Control RC 43947
by David Baldacci 
read by L.J. Ganser
3 cassettes
Jason Archer tells his attorney wife, Sidney, that he is flying
to Los Angeles for a job interview when in fact he is traveling
to Seattle to hand over company secrets. When the L.A. plane that
Jason was supposed to be on blows up, Sidney and FBI agent Lee
Sawyer try to determine what actually happened to Jason. Strong
language, violence, and some descriptions of sex. Bestseller
1997.
Total Eclipse RC 44454
by Liz Rigbey 
read by Michele Schaeffer
4 cassettes
Lomax, an astronomer, falls for his seductive new assistant,
Julia, but soon learns she is about to stand trial for the brutal
murders of her husband and stepdaughter. As Lomax's affair with
her deepens, he uncovers a tangled web of relationships in his
lover's past, particularly between Julia and each of her late
husband's children. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
1995.
Tremor RC 43602
by Winston Graham 
read by Graeme Malcolm
2 cassettes
A disparate cast of characters comes together at a resort hotel
in Agadir, Morocco, during the 1960 earthquake. On the guest list
are a novelist on the make, a thief on the lam, a movie actress
on a shoot, three prostitutes on the run, and others. The final
disaster affects them all. 1995.
The Ugly Duckling RC 43888
by Iris Johansen 
read by Barbara Pinolini
2 cassettes
Mousy, plain-faced Nell Calder is attending a party on a Greek
island when her husband and daughter are killed and she is badly
mutilated. But why? Nicholas Tanek investigates as Nell emerges
with a gorgeous new face and a new reason to live-revenge. Strong
language, some violence, and some descriptions of sex. 1996.
Undone RC 44611
by Michael Kimball 
read by Chuck Benson
3 cassettes
Bobby Swift and his wife, Noel, have plotted the perfect crime,
but it requires Bobby to fake his death and be buried in a coffin
for hours before Noel digs him out. Then Bobby's "body" turns up
missing, and the undertaker is found murdered. Strong language,
some violence, and some explicit descriptions of sex. 1996.
Unnatural Exposure RC 44749
by Patricia Cornwell 
read by Madelyn Buzzard
2 cassettes
Medical examiner Kay Scarpetta is puzzled by what appears to be
the latest victim of a serial killer. This woman is elderly and
has an unusual rash. As Scarpetta realizes in horror the disease
she's dealing with, the woman's killer begins taunting Scarpetta
through the Internet. Strong language. Bestseller 1997.
Vengeance in Death RC 45064
by J.D. Robb 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
In the year 2058 New York cop Eve Dallas is faced with a serial
killer who appears to have some connection with Eve's billionaire
Irish husband Roarke's past. As Eve chases clues that keep
pointing to Roarke's servant, Roarke secretly tries to solve the
case, too. Strong language, violence, and explicit descriptions
of sex. Bestseller 1997.
White Star RC 44875
by James Thayer 
read by Gregory Gorton
2 cassettes
Owen Gray, once an expert marine sniper in Vietnam, is now an
assistant U.S. attorney in New York and the adoptive father of
three Asian children. When a mysterious sniper begins picking off
people around him, the reluctant former marksman takes up the
challenge for a showdown. Violence and some strong language.
1995.
A Wild Justice RC 43494
by Craig Thomas 
read by Ken Kliban
3 cassettes
A posh birthday party in Washington, D.C., culminates in the
brutal murders of businessman Billy Grainger and his wife, Beth.
Beth's brother, ex-CIA agent John Lock, delves into the crime,
uncovers Grainger's drug-smuggling ring, and follows the trail to
Siberia. Violence. 1995.
You Belong to Me RC 46009
by Mary Higgins Clark 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
Once a prosecutor and then a psychologist, radio talk-show host
Susan Chandler explores how lonely women are lured into
relationships that turn deadly. On the air, witnesses offer
evidence concerning one such victim. Unfortunately, Susan does
not suspect that the killer has tuned in. Some violence.
Bestseller 1998.
Village Tales
At Home in Mitford: The Mitford Years, Volume 1 RC 44194
by Jan Karon 
read by Gary Tipton
3 cassettes
After years as a priest in the Southern village of Mitford,
Father Tim wonders if he should move on. Then on the day a letter
from the bishop tells him to "hang in there . . . give it a
year," things begin to change, including an interest in his
neighbor, Cynthia, and the arrival of Barnabas, a rather large
dog. Prequel to A Light in the Window (RC 44195). 1994.
High Rising RC 44375
by Angela Thirkell 
read by Anne Flosnik
2 cassettes
Now that her three older sons are self-supporting,
forty-five-year-old widowed novelist Laura Morland need only
worry about young Tony, who "has a splendid natural resistance to
learning in any form." But money complications make way for
social ones as almost everyone in Laura's circle of
acquaintances-from her publisher to her secretary-becomes
involved in convoluted romances fraught with misunderstandings.
1933.
A Light in the Window: The Mitford Years, Volume 2 RC 44195
by Jan Karon 
read by Gary Tipton
3 cassettes
Father Tim has returned from his two-month visit to Ireland and
finds much in the Southern village of Mitford the same. His
neighbor Cynthia still has a special place in his heart, but he
just can't seem to commit himself to her. And a wealthy widow is
chasing after him. Sequel to At Home in Mitford (RC 44194). 1995.
Miss Willie RC 43275
by Janice Holt Giles 
read by Terry Hayes Sales
2 cassettes
The story of a kindly woman who moves to the Kentucky hills in
the late 1940s to teach in a one-room schoolhouse. At first she
tries to change the rustic habits of the stubborn and proud
Appalachian people. But eventually she comes to appreciate the
dignity of their customs and finds fulfillment in their way of
life. 1951.
Out to Canaan: The Mitford Years, Volume 4 RC 44958
by Jan Karon 
read by Gary Tipton
2 cassettes
Changes are coming to the small town 
of Mitford. Father Tim Kavanagh, the Episcopal priest, and his
wife Cynthia are thinking about retirement, the two candidates
for mayor seem to be splitting the town in half, the bakery may
be closing, and a real estate company out of Florida wants to
turn Fernbank into a spa. Sequel to These High, Green Hills (RC
44196). Bestseller 1997.
The Rector's Wife RC 43361
by Joanna Trollope 
read by Barbara Caruso
2 cassettes
For twenty years, Anna Bouverie lived a stifled, penurious life
as wife of the village rector. Her husband is passed over for a
promotion to archdeacon, and he retreats into bitterness. But
Anna begins a journey of self-discovery, taking a menial job and
considering two new lovers. 1991.
Tara's Healing RC 43240
by Janice Holt Giles 
read by Bruce Huntey
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Dr. Tara Cochrane is a tired and broken young man. Hod Pierce,
from Tara's World War II command, invites him to 
try the quiet rural life of Piney Ridge, Kentucky. The city boy
slowly begins to understand the beauty of the hard mountain life,
and thus to find meaning in his own existence. 1951.
These High, Green Hills: The Mitford Years, Volume 3 RC 44196
by Jan Karon 
read by Gary Tipton
3 cassettes
Now married, Father Tim and Cynthia are settling down in the
rectory. Cynthia's cottage next door will be kept for her work
and private retreats. In the Southern village of Mitford, life
goes on. Dooley adjusts to prep school, Father Tim's housekeeper
has twins, and Emma's clerical skills prove enormous. Sequel to A
Light in the Window (RC 44195). 1996.
A Visit to Highbury RC 41557
by Joan Austen-Leigh 
read by Jennifer Mendenhall
1 cassette
The great-great-grand-niece of Jane Austen has taken some of the
minor characters from Austen's Emma (RC 23490) and allowed them
to come into the spotlight. Letters between Mrs. Goddard, the
school headmistress in Highbury, and her recently remarried
sister, Mrs. Pinkney, in London speculate on events in the lives
of residents of both locations-especially a few romances. 1993.
Wars
Battlefields and Playgrounds RC 43196
by Janos Nyiri 
read by Ken Kliban
4 cassettes
Portrays the suffering of Hungarian Jews during World War II as
seen through the eyes of József Sondor, a defiant six-year-old.
József, with his mother and brother, endures peril and privation
at the hands of the Nazis. The hellish conditions bring out both
the best and the worst aspects of humanity. 1989.
The Bitterest Age RC 44718
by Raymond Kennedy 
read by Nanette Savard
2 cassettes
As she endures the nightly Allied bombings and the privations of
war with her mother and brother in 1945 Germany, ten-year-old
Ingeborg Maas has faith that her soldier father will return alive
from the front. Ingeborg's courage sustains her family through
the terrible final days of the war. 1994.
Choosers of the Slain RC 43698
by James H. Cobb 
read by Rick Rohan
2 cassettes
In the year 2006, Argentina storms a British research station in
Antarctica, a first step toward taking over the frigid continent.
The destroyer USS Cunningham is ordered to interdict an Argentine
supply convoy and unsheathes high-tech firepower as she
encounters extensive enemy air and sea forces. Strong language.
1996.
Courage under Fire RC 44351
by Patrick Sheane Duncan 
read by L.J. Ganser
2 cassettes
His army career stalled by a friendly fire incident during the
Gulf War, Lieutenant Colonel Nat Serling is handed the job of
finding out whether a female chopper pilot deserves the Medal of
Honor. Serling sorts through conflicting evidence to uncover a
truth that could destroy the woman's reputation but save his own
career. Strong language and violence. 1996.
The Dirty War RC 43577
by Charles H. Slaughter 
read by Barry Bernson
1 cassette
During the Argentine military coup of the late 1970s, two boys
spend their days scheming to earn tips from yanqui tourists. When
their friends and families become targets of the new regime, the
boys are drawn into a stark world of political persecution and
torture. Violence. For junior and senior high readers. 1994.
Fatal Terrain RC 45110
by Dale Brown 
read by Gary Tipton
4 cassettes
When tensions erupt between Taiwan and mainland China, America's
options are limited by its recent military cutbacks. On the scene
is USAF pilot McLanahan in a modified B-52 equipped with the
latest cruise missiles. When war breaks out, McLanahan's lethal
payload turns the 
tide of the conflict. Strong language. Bestseller 1997.
The Gulf RC 43633
by David Poyer 
read by L.J. Ganser
3 cassettes
While deployed in the Persian Gulf, the guided-missile frigate
USS Turner Van Zandt is ordered to lead a convoy of supertankers
through mined waters. When hostile fire sinks a navy destroyer,
the Van Zandt's commanding officer sees 
the opportunity to avenge past wrongs. Strong language, violence,
and descriptions of sex. 1990.
Highways to a War RC 43707
by Christopher J. Koch 
read by Steven Carpenter
3 cassettes
Asia, 1976. Australian photojournalist Mike Langford, missing in
war-torn Cambodia, is presumed killed or captured. An old friend
obtains the taped diaries that Langford kept until he
disappeared. They reveal a story of duty, courage, and love
through a decade of strife in Indochina. Strong language and
violence. 1995.
1968 RC 43735
by Joe Haldeman 
read by Chuck Young
2 cassettes
Portrays a year in the life of a young American soldier who
endures some of the most brutal combat of the Vietnam War.
Wounded and paranoid, he returns home to face a harsh
readjustment with his family and girlfriend in a society out of
control. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of sex.
1995.
Rogue Warrior: Task Force Blue  
RC 43276
by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes
In Key West Marcinko and Task Force Blue bungle the rescue of the
Secretary 
of the Navy from a hijacked 727, and Marcinko faces a court
martial. But that must wait until he can stanch the flow 
of weapons from government arsenals. Sequel to Rogue Warrior:
Green Team (RC 41020). Strong language and violence. Bestseller
1996.
San Juan Hill RC 43813
by Will Henry 
read by David Palmer
2 cassettes
A story of the assault on San Juan Hill by Teddy Roosevelt's
Rough Riders during the Spanish-American War in 1898. Recounts
the war preparations as seen through the eyes of the soldiers and
describes the brutal conflict and its bitter aftermath. Strong
language and violence. 1962.
Storm Flight RC 43575
by Mark Berent 
read by Roy Avers
4 cassettes
In this sequel to Eagle Station (RC 42374), American fliers
languish in a secret Vietnamese prison, their names removed from
official records. When U.S. officials discover a Soviet KGB
scheme to exploit the prisoners, they direct a daring raid behind
enemy lines. Strong language and violence. 1993.
Tales of the South Pacific RC 44249
by James A. Michener 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes (Reissue)
Nineteen World War II tales that won the Pulitzer Prize. They
describe the strain and the boredom, the careful planning and
heroic action, the color and beauty of the islands, and all that
made up life during the critical days of the war in the Pacific.
Strong language. 1947.
Tiger's Tail RC 43644
by Gus Lee 
read by Ed Blake
3 cassettes
In 1974, Chinese American Captain Jackson Kan is ordered to the
Korean demilitarized zone to find a missing army prosecutor. Kan
liberates a hell-hole prison, deposes the power-mad commander,
and defuses a plot to incite a war, all while dealing with his
own problems as a Vietnam veteran and as a Chinese son. Strong
language and violence. 1996.
To Kill the Leopard RC 43886
by Theodore Taylor 
read by Gregory Gorton
2 cassettes
In March 1941, American merchant marine officer Sully Jordan
survives the sinking of his oil tanker by a German U-boat. After
the same U-boat torpedoes another tanker from under him one year
later, Jordan takes command of an armed decoy Q-ship, hoping to
settle the score. Strong language, violence, and descriptions of
sex. For senior high and older readers. 1993.
The Two-Headed Eagle RC 44348
by John Biggins 
read by Robert Blumenfeld
3 cassettes
In this sequel to The Emperor's Coloured Coat (RC 43006),
Austro-Hungarian naval officer Otto Prohaska is ordered to the
flying service on the embattled Italian front in 1916. Though
Prohaska and his fragile plane are tested to the limit in aerial
combat, he finds the main obstacle to victory to be his own
incompetent superiors. Violence. 1993.
Westerns
Badlands RC 40919
by Richard S. Wheeler 
read by Don Emmick
3 cassettes
To finish her dead father's study of fossils, spirited Candace
Huxtable leaves England for the Nebraska Territory in 1859 to
join a field expedition. The other members attempt to exclude
her, but she goes with them to the arid and untamed Badlands.
There greedy Dr. Van Vliet plunders the sacred Sioux burial
grounds for artifacts, putting the party in mortal danger. Some
violence. Winner of the Golden Spur award. 1992.
The Bear Paw Horses RC 43838
by Will Henry 
read by John Polk
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Crazy Horse of the Oglala Sioux makes a dying request that his
people locate a secret herd of four hundred horses. Con Jenkins,
a cunning outlaw, joins an elderly medicine man and a
white-hating Indian girl in a desperate effort to recover the
hidden herd and save the Sioux people. Violence. 1973.
Bordersnakes RC 43433
by James Crumley 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
A ribald tale of two ornery guys on a rollicking spree, each of
whom seeks to avenge past wrongs. One wants payback for his own
near-murder, while the other aims to even the score over his
stolen inheritance. They descend into the sordid world of the
drug trade along the Mexican border. Strong language and
violence. Bestseller 1996.
Bowdrie's Law RC 44245
by Louis L'Amour 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
When his old friend is killed by an outlaw gang, Texas Ranger
Chick Bowdrie vows to settle the score. Bowdrie tracks the gang
to a town that is as wild and tough as any in the Old West, where
he faces formidable odds in a fierce showdown. Violence. 1984.
Buchanan Says No RC 45306
by Jonas Ward 
read by Bob Askey
1 cassette
Wrangler Tom Buchanan finishes the trail ride driving stolen
cattle from Mexico. When the paymaster doesn't show up at the
meeting place in California, Buchanan heads into town looking for
him. Young gunslinger Mike Sandoe tags along. Unfortunately,
their prey eludes them and the two find nothing but trouble.
1957.
The California Trail: Trail Drive Series, Book 5 RC 42479
by Ralph Compton 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
After their exploits in Mexico on The 
Bandera Trail (RC 41983), Gil and Van Austin return to the Texas
ranch with cattle. Now the Gold Rush in California has created an
unprecedented demand for beef, and the adventurous brothers see
the opportunity of a lifetime. In 1850, they set off to drive
four thousand head of cattle westward, not knowing the dangers
that lie ahead. Violence and strong language. 1994.
Chancy RC 43804
by Louis L'Amour 
read by Jack Fox
1 cassette
Nineteen-year-old Otis Chancy, a drifter without prospects,
struggles against corrupt lawmen, ruthless outlaws, and hostile
Indians as he makes his way to manhood and forms his own cattle
gang. 1968.
Comanche Moon RC 45001
by Larry McMurtry 
read by Bob Askey
5 cassettes
In this sequel to Dead Man's Walk 
(RC 43928) and prequel to Lonesome Dove (RC 22959), Texas Rangers
McCrae and Call face Comanche raids and attacks by bandits, aid
white settlers in the region, and try to survive frontier
hardships. Some strong language and violence. Bestseller 1997.
Cow Country RC 44594
by Will James 
read by Jim Zeiger
1 cassette
Eight short stories that capture the hardships, adventures, and
spirit of the American cowboy. The selections tell of wild
mustangs, ornery steers, lonesome drifters, and fancy dudes of
the West in the early 1900s. 1995.
The Crossing RC 43839
by Will Henry 
read by John Polk
2 cassettes
Lieutenant Jud Reeves, a well-bred grandson of southern generals,
joins the Confederate campaign to secure the south- western
territory in 1861. He encounters an embattled frontier contested
by Union soldiers and Apaches avenging their stolen homelands.
Violence. 1958.
Dead Man's Walk RC 43928
by Larry McMurtry 
read by Bob Askey
3 cassettes
This prequel to Lonesome Dove 
(RC 22959) recounts the early days of Gus McCrae and Woodrow
Call. Not yet twenty, they enlist as members of the Texas Rangers
under the command of Caleb Cobb. Traveling with the Rangers is
Matilda Roberts, a hefty whore who occasionally provides comfort
to the men as they head for Santa Fe across the Jornada Del
Muerto. Violence, strong language, and some descriptions of sex.
Bestseller 1995.
The Diablo Grant RC 43723
by James M. Reasoner 
read by Robert Sams
1 cassette
In this sequel to Stark's Justice 
(RC 39036), Juan Espina, the town drunk of a New Mexico territory
settlement, claims historical rights to nearby ranch property and
has an ancient land grant to prove it. The dispute goes before
Judge Stark, who rules for Espina, thus unleashing chaos in the
frontier town. 1994.
Diary of a Loving Heart: Love Is a Gentle Stranger, Volume 3 RC
44257
by June Masters Bacher 
read by Janis Gray
2 cassettes
Chris Beth struggles to deal with the death of her sister,
Vangie; the diary she left behind; and a host of other problems
that test her faith. Sequel to Love's Silent Song (RC 44256).
1984.
The Dodge City Trail: Trail Drive Series, Book 8 RC 43450
by Ralph Compton 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
With the railroad reaching Dodge City, a new market for cattle
opens up. In Texas, Dan Ember and his fellow ranchers are
desperate to move their livestock out of reach of the corrupt tax
collector. The cattlemen strike out on a treacherous drive north.
Violence and strong language. 1995.
Dreams of Eagles RC 44012
by William W. Johnstone 
read by Jack Fox
2 cassettes
In this sequel to Eyes of Eagles 
(RC 44011), Jamie MacCallister and his wife settle with friends
on virgin Colorado land in 1837. The pioneers face privation and
the dangers of an untamed West as they struggle to survive and to
forge a life on the plains. Strong language and violence. 1994.
End of the Drive RC 45059
by Louis L'Amour 
read by David Hartley-Margolin
2 cassettes
Tales of the untamed West depicting people who face harsh tests
that threaten their way of life and survival. In "Caprock
Rancher," a boy comes to realize his father's courage as the two
join forces to recover their neighbors' lost savings from
outlaws. Violence. Bestseller 1997.
Eyes of Eagles RC 44011
by William W. Johnstone 
read by Jack Fox
3 cassettes
In this prequel to Dreams of Eagles 
(RC 44012), Jamie MacCallister is captured by Indians at age
seven and later escapes to a Kentucky settlement, where he soon
finds himself charged with murder. Fleeing westward, he joins
with Jim Bowie, Sam Houston, and other Texans at the beleaguered
Alamo. Strong language. 1993.
The Feathered Sombrero RC 39989
by Norman A. Fox 
read by Larry Shapiro
2 cassettes
After being pardoned by the governor, former outlaw Rowdy Dow
sees an advertisement addressed to him. A captain named Trimble
wants to meet with Dow in Bearclaw, and he'll be wearing a
feathered sombrero. Nearly there, Dow and his partner, Stumpy
Grampis, help an injured Mexican, then glimpse a frightened woman
in a window. When the woman and the Mexican mysteriously vanish,
Dow suspects Captain Trimble. Some strong language and some
violence. 1949.
Forlorn River RC 39959
by Zane Grey 
read by Gregory Ricks
2 cassettes (Reissue)
Story of the lawless days of cattle thieves and the exciting
pursuit and capture of wild horses. A courageous loner must
rescue his woman and clear his name in a trumped-up charge of
cattle rustling. 1927.
Halo RC 44122
by John Loveday 
read by John Stratton
2 cassettes
A boy comes of age while en route to Oregon on a wagon train in
the mid-1800s. He chronicles the daily routine, his discovery of
art, and his sexual awakening with a mother and daughter. The
blissful peace of the trail is lost when the party reaches Halo,
a raucous frontier town. Strong language and descriptions of sex.
1992.
The High Missouri: Rivers West  
RC 43086
by Win Blevins 
read by Roy Avers
3 cassettes
Montreal, 1820. Dylan Elfed Davis Campbell has had it with
working in a bank and resigns on the spur of the moment. He plans
to follow the calling he has always felt to be a priest. But his
father is outraged, and they have a disagreement. With no place
to go, Dylan hides in a barn. There he meets a druid, who offers
him a chance to join the North- West Company and spread the word
of God to the Indians. Some strong language and some violence.
1994.
I, Tom Horn RC 44951
by Will Henry 
read by John Polk
3 cassettes
In this fictional autobiography of the legendary cavalry scout,
rodeo rider, and Pinkerton detective, the author deals 
with the question, "Did Tom Horn kill fourteen-year-old Willie
Nickell in 1901, or was he, in fact, framed?" Strong language.
1975.
Jesse James: Death of a Legend  
RC 43788
by Will Henry 
read by Jack Fox
2 cassettes
A fictionalized account of the life of the infamous outlaw.
Traces his youth in post-Civil War Missouri, where he joined the
Confederate guerillas, his adult years as a ruthless renegade and
robber of banks and trains, and his death at the hands of his
comrades in 1882. Violence and some strong language. 1954.
The Last Lawmen RC 40977
by Jack Cummings 
read by Phil Regensdorf
1 cassette
Two Arizona Rangers strive to tame the lawless frontier in 1903.
Rangers Wes Barnes and Jake Kenton, uneasy partners with
conflicting views on the use of deadly force, separate and become
enemies. Wild chases and gun battles ensue. 1994.
Legacy: Journeys of the Stranger, Book 1  RC 39963
by Al Lacy 
read by Ellen Frost
2 cassettes
Visiting nurse Breanna Baylor is saved from a stampede by a
mysterious, scripture-quoting man named John, who explains that
his vocation is helping people. Troubled by her feelings for him,
Breanna sends him away but then realizes her mistake. As Breanna
searches for John, he fulfils his promise to watch over her by
saving her from a gang of outlaws but slips away before she sees
him. Some violence. 1994.


Love Is a Gentle Stranger: Volume 1  
RC 44252
by June Masters Bacher 
read by Janis Gray
1 cassette
After being jilted by her fiancé, gently bred Chris Beth Kelly
heads for the Oregon Territory, where she plans to be a teacher.
Shortly after her arrival, Chris Beth learns that her sister is
also coming to Oregon. Both girls find themselves engulfed by a
family of friends, and their individual pains begin to heal.
Prequel 
to Love's Silent Song (RC 44256). 
1983.
Love's Silent Song: Love Is a Gentle Stranger, Volume 2 RC 44256
by June Master Bacher 
read by Janis Gray
2 cassettes
Following their double wedding, Chris Beth and Joe and Vangie and
Wilson wonder what the future holds. Can their small community
support a minister, or will the families be separated? As they
pray for guidance, they must also endure several plagues that
strike their town. Sequel to Love Is a Gentle Stranger (RC
44252). 1983.
The Meadow RC 40980
by James Galvin 
read by Phil Regensdorf
2 cassettes
In a series of elegant vignettes, Galvin evokes the hundred-year
history of a high-country meadow in the American West. He savors
the weather, the wildlife, and the individuals who struggle to
survive the harsh conditions. Of the meadow, Galvin states, "No
one owns it, no one ever will." 1992.
The Morrow Anthology of Great Western Short Stories RC 44649
edited by Jon Tuska and Vicki Piekarski 
read by Roy Avers
5 cassettes
This collection of twenty-eight western short stories from the
1920s-1990s includes works by renowned writers such as Zane Grey,
Max Brand, Conrad Richter, Alan LeMay, and Cherry Wilson, as well
as contemporary tales by Richard Wheeler, Ernest Haycox, and
Cynthia Haseloff. Some strong language. 1997.
Murphy's Ambush RC 43237
by Gary Paulsen and Brian Burks 
read by John Polk
1 cassette
Al Murphy, Murphy's Stand (RC 42350), is in love again and a
sheriff in Turrett, New Mexico. When rancher Travis Price's wife
and two children are killed, Murphy pursues the Apache suspects.
But then Price is murdered in the doctor's office, leading Murphy
on a new trail. Some violence. 1995.
No Survivors RC 44175
by Will Henry 
read by Jim Zeiger
2 cassettes
A fictionalized account of the 1876 Battle of the Little Bighorn,
as recorded in the journal of its sole survivor, Colonel John
Clayton. Clayton, who is captured and adopted by the Sioux, faces
a crisis of identity when his tribe rides against the army in
which he once served. Violence. 1950.
The Prairieton Raid RC 40915
by Lauran Paine 
read by Don Emmick
1 cassette
Three men plan to rob the bank in Prairieton. They ride in
separately and take jobs: Henry at the blacksmith's, Buff at the
stable, and Boice as a stage driver. But before they can pull off
the heist, the stage carrying a large deposit is robbed and
driver Boice is injured. Buff and Henry join a posse to help the
bank recover the money, so they can go ahead with their original
scheme. Strong language and some violence. 1994.
The Rio Grande: Rivers West 
RC 43279
by Jory Sherman 
read by Roy Avers
2 cassettes
Matthew Caine, an agent of the U.S. government and a friend to
the Shoshone and Arapaho Indians, has spent his life along the
Rio Grande. This big, powerful man is known as "El Gigante" by
the Spanish, who fear he is a spy planning to help take away
their land. As war rages between the nations, Caine, who has come
to love a Shoshone woman, will find his life endangered along the
banks of his beloved river. Strong language and some violence.
1994.
Scarlet Plume: The Buckskin Man Tales, Volume 3 RC 43595
by Frederick Manfred 
read by J.P. Linton
3 cassettes
A fictional account based on the 1862 Sioux Uprising in
Minnesota. Despite the atrocities she witnesses and suffers,
captive Judith Raveling falls passionately in love with the
mysterious Scarlet Plume. Sequel to Lord Grizzly (RC 42917).
Violence and explicit descriptions of sex. 1964.
The Scout RC 42867
by Harry Combs 
read by Chuck Benson
5 cassettes
In this sequel to Brules (RC 39642), 
narrator Cat Brules recounts his days 
as an Indian scout with the U.S. Army. Describes in detail
Custer's debacle against the Sioux, the army's pursuit of the Nez
Perce, and other brutal events. Strong language and violence.
1995.
The Shawnee Trail: Trail Drive Series, Book 6 RC 42480
by Ralph Compton 
read by Bob Askey
2 cassettes
As payment for his ride on the California Trail (RC 42479), Long
John Coons now has his own herd of longhorns. With trouble
brewing over states' rights, Coons jumps quickly to drive the
cattle to St. Louis. His crew of misfits is almost as dangerous
as the Comanches along the trail ahead. Strong language and
violence. 1994.
Sierra: A Novel of the California Gold Rush RC 43937
by Richard S. Wheeler 
read by Chuck Benson
3 cassettes
In 1849 young Ulysses McQueen heads for the California gold
field, leaving his pregnant wife in Iowa. That same year, former
soldier Stephen Jarvis strikes gold and makes his fortune. The
two men become partners in a farming venture, just as McQueen's
wife arrives to join him. 1996.
Stouthearted Men: A Cole Ryerson Novel  RC 39995
by R.C. House 
read by Don Emmick
2 cassettes
When Bad-Face Ike Bodene breaks out 
of jail, U.S. Marshal Cole Ryerson calls together a posse of
stouthearted men made up of his most trusted and expert friends.
Bodene has vowed to kill Ryerson if he comes after him, but that
makes the marshal even more determined. Ryerson encounters a
surprise along the way: a woman with as stout a heart as any of
his posse. Strong language and violence. 1995.
The Texas Bank Robbing Company  
RC 40964
by Giles Tippette 
read by Gregory Ricks
2 cassettes
Outlaw Wilson Young thinks robbing 
the steamboat will be a snap. Instead, he winds up in a Laredo
jail. But he manages to escape, rejoin his gang, and establish
The Texas Bank Robbing Company. A fast-paced adventure tale.
Strong language. 1982.
Tracks of Deceit: Katy Steele Adventures, Volume 1 RC 43159
by Alan and Gilbert Morris 
read by Martha Harmon Pardee
2 cassettes
When a Central Pacific Railroad detective is murdered in 1867,
his daughter, Katy, is hired to investigate. Katy and her fellow
sleuth, Sam Bronte, uncover a web of official corruption as they
track the murderer and railroad saboteur. 1996.
True Grit RC 44219
by Charles Portis 
read by Terry Hayes Sales
1 cassette (Reissue)
Fifty years afterward, a woman tells how, as a girl of fourteen,
she, a federal marshal, and a Texas Ranger tracked her father's
murderer from Arkansas into Indian territory. Some violence.
1968.
The Virginia City Trail: Trail Drive Series, Book 7 RC 42481
by Ralph Compton 
read by Chuck Benson
2 cassettes
Nelson Story has money from his gold claim but is a marked man.
The Plummer gang is after him for hanging the outlaw sheriff,
Henry Plummer. So Story and his partners go to Fort Worth, buy
cattle, and head for Illinois markets, but poor grass and high
tolls turn them toward Montana and dangerous Sioux lands.
Violence and strong language. 1994.
West of Dodge: Frontier Stories  
RC 44536
by Louis L'Amour 
read by John Polk
2 cassettes
Fourteen tales of gunfighters, cowhands, and lawmen of the Old
West. In the title story, an itinerant gunfighter rides into
Dodge and learns of the widespread sentiment against the local
marshal. In time marshal and gunslinger join forces and undo a
plot to take over the town. 1996.
