RD Instruction 1940-T
Table of Contents
Page 1
PART 1940 - GENERAL                                                       

Subpart T - System For Delivery of Certain Rural Development Programs

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Sec.		Page

1940.951	General.	1
1940.952	[Reserved]	1
1940.953	Definitions.	2
1940.954	State participation.	3

	(a)  Application.	3
	(b)  Selecting States.	4
	(c)  Notification of selection.	5
	(d)  Determining State eligibility.	5
	(e)  Eligibility requirements.	5

1940.955	Distribution of program funds to designated States.	6
1940.956	State rural economic development review panel.	6

	(a)  General.	6
	(b)  Duties and responsibilities.	7
	(c)  Membership.	11
	(d)  Failure to appoint panel members.	14
	(e)  Panel vacancies.	14
	(f)  Chairperson and vice chairperson.	14
	(g)  Compensation to panel members.	14
	(h)  Rules governing panel meetings.	14
	(i)  Federal Advisory Committee Act.	15
	(j)  Liability of members.	15

1940.957	State coordinator.	15
1940.958	Designated agency.	15
1940.959	Area plan.	15
1940.960	Federal employee panel members.	17
1940.961	Allocation of appropriated funds.	18

	(a)  Initial allocation.	18
	(b)  Reserve.	18
	(c)  Pooling.	18
	(d)  Request for funds.	19

1940.962	Authority to transfer direct loan amounts.	19

	(a)  Transfer of funds.	19
	(b)  Limitation on amounts transferred.	19
	(c)  National Office concurrence.	19

RD Instruction 1940-T
Table of Contents
Page 2

Sec. 		Page
1940.963	Authority to transfer guaranteed loan amounts.	20

	(a)  Transfer of funds.	20
	(b)  Limitation on amounts transferred.	20
	(c)  National Office concurrence.	20

1940.964	[Reserved]	20
1940.965	Processing project preapplications/applications.	20

	(a)  Preapplications/applications.	20
	(b)  Rural Development review.	20
	(c)  Applicant notification.	21
	(d)  Information to State coordinator.	21
	(e)  Rural Development review of priority funding list.	21
	(f)  Obligation of funds.	21

1940.966	- 1940.967  [Reserved]	22
1940.968	Rural Economic Development Review Panel Grant.	22

	(a)  General.	22
	(b)  Objective.	22
	(c)  Authorities, delegations, and redelegations.	22
	(d)  Joint funds.	22
	(e)  Eligibility.	22
	(f)  Purpose.	22
	(g)  Limitations.	23
	(h)  Other considerations.	23
	(i)  Application processing.	24
	(j)  Grant approval, obligation of funds, and 
	     grant closing.	25
	(k)  Fund disbursement.	26
	(l)  Title.	26
	(m)  Costs.	26
	(n)  Budget changes.	26
	(o)  Programmatic changes.	26
	(p)  Financial reporting.	27
	(q)  Audit requirements.	27
	(r)  Grant cancellation.	27
	(s)  Grant servicing.	27
	(t)  Subsequent grants.	27

1940.969	Forms, exhibits, and subparts.	27
1940.970	[Reserved]	28
1940.971	Delegation of authority.	28
1940.972	- 1940.999  [Reserved]	28
1940.1000	OMB control number.	28
Exhibit A	- Requirements for Administration of Rural Economic 
            Development Review Panel Grants (Panel Grants)
o0o

RD Instruction 1940-T

Part 1940 - GENERAL

Subpart T - System For Delivery of Certain Rural Development Programs

1940.951  General.

	This subpart sets forth Rural Development policies and procedures for the 
delivery of certain rural development programs under a rural economic 
development review panel established in eligible States authorized under 
Sections 365, 366, 367, and 368 of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development 
Act (7 U.S.C. 1921 et. seq.), as amended.

(a)  If a State desires to participate in this pilot program, the 
Governor of the State may submit an application to the Under Secretary 
for Small Community and Rural Development, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Room 219-A, Administration Building, Washington, DC 20250 in 
accordance with 1940.954 of this subpart.

(b)  The Under Secretary shall designate not more than five States in 
which to make rural economic development review panels applicable during 
any established time period for the purpose of reviewing and ranking 
applications submitted for funding under certain rural development 
programs.  The following time periods have been established for 
participation in this pilot program:

First period  - Balance of fiscal year (FY) 1992 to 
September 30, 1993;
Second period - October 1, 1993 to September 30, 1994;
Third period  - October 1, 1994 to September 30, 1995; and
Fourth period - October 1, 1995 to September 30, 1996.

The State will be bound by the provisions of this pilot program only 
during the established time period(s) for which the State is designated.  
If a designated State does not remain an eligible State during the 
established time period(s) for which the State was designated, the State 
will not be eligible to participate in this program and cannot revert to 
the old ranking and applicant selection process.

(c)  Assistance under each designated rural development program shall be 
provided to eligible designated States for qualified projects in 
accordance with this subpart.

(d)  Federal statutes provide for extending Rural Development financially 
supported programs without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national 
origin, marital status, age, familial status, or physical/mental handicap 
(provided the participant possesses the capacity to enter into legal 
contracts.)

1940.952  [Reserved]
______________________________________________________________________________
DISTRIBUTION:  WSDC                                      Loan and Grant Making
                                                           General
1

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T


1940.953  Definitions.

	For the purpose of this subpart:

Administrator.  The Administrator of Rural Development.

Area plan.  The long-range development plan developed for a local or 
regional area in a State.

Designated agency.  An agency selected by the Governor of the State to 
provide the panel and the State coordinator with support for the daily 
operation of the panel.

Designated State.  A State selected by the Under Secretary, in accordance 
with 1940.954 of this subpart, to participate in this program.

Designated rural development program.  A program carried out under 
Sections 304(b), 306(a), or subsections (a) through (f) and (h) of 
Section 310B of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act 
(7 U.S.C. 1926(a)), as amended, or under Section 1323 of the Food 
Security Act of 1985, for which funds are available at any time during 
the FY under such section, including, but not limited to, the following:

(1)  Water and Waste Disposal Insured or Guaranteed Loans;

(2)  Development Grants for Community Domestic Water and Waste 
Disposal Systems;

(3)  Technical Assistance and Training Grants;

(4)  Emergency Community Water Assistance Grants;

(5)  Community Facilities Insured and Guaranteed Loans;

(6)  Business and Industry Guaranteed Loans;

(7)  Industrial Development Grants;

(8)  Intermediary Relending Program;

(9)  Drought and Disaster Relief Guaranteed Loans;

(10) Disaster Assistance for Rural Business Enterprises;

(11) Nonprofit National Rural Development and Finance Corporations.

Eligible State.  With respect to a FY, a State that has been determined 
eligible in accordance with 1940.954 (e) of this subpart.

2

1940.953 (Con.)	  RD Instruction 1940-T


Nondesignated State.  A State that has not been selected to participate 
in this pilot program.

Qualified project.  Any project:

(1)  For which the designated agency has identified alternative 
Federal, State, local or private sources of assistance and has 
identified related activities in the State; and

(2)  To which the Administrator is required to provide assistance.

State.  Any of the fifty States.

State coordinator.  The officer or employee of the State appointed by the 
Governor to carry out the activities described in 1940.957 of this 
subpart.

State Director.  The head of Rural Development at the local level charged 
with administering designated rural development programs.

State rural economic development review panel or "panel".  An advisory 
panel that meets the requirements of 1940.956 of this subpart.

Under Secretary.  In the U. S. Department of Agriculture, the Under 
Secretary for Small Community and Rural Development.

1940.954  State participation.

(a)  Application.  If a State desires to participate in this pilot 
program, the Governor may submit an original and one copy of Standard 
Form (SF) 424.1, "Application for Federal Assistance (For Non-
construction)," to the Under Secretary.  The five States designated by 
the Under Secretary to participate in the first established time period 
will be selected from among applications received not later than 60 
calendar days from the effective date of this subpart.  If a designated 
State desires to participate in additional time periods, applications are 
not required to be resubmitted; however, the Governor must notify the 
Under Secretary, in writing, no later than July 31 of each FY, and the 
State must submit evidence of eligibility requirements each FY in 
accordance with 1940.954 (e)(2) of this subpart.  Beginning in FY 1993, 
applications must be submitted to the Under Secretary no later than July 
31 if a State desires to be selected to fill vacancies that occur when 
designated States do not roll over into another established time period.  
States should include the following information with SF 424.1:



3

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.954 (a) (Con.)


(1)  A narrative signed by the Governor including reasons for State 
participation in this program and reasons why a project review and 
ranking process by a State panel will improve the economic and 
social conditions of rural areas in the State.  The narrative will 
also include the time period(s) for which the State wishes to 
participate.

(2)  A proposal outlining the method for meeting all the following 
eligibility requirements and the timeframes established for meeting 
each requirement:

(i)  Establishing a rural economic development review panel in 
accordance with 1940.956 of this subpart.  When established, 
the name, title, and address of each proposed member should be 
included and the chairperson and vice chairperson should be 
identified.

(ii)  Governor's proposed designation of a State agency to 
support the State coordinator and the panel.  The name, 
address, and telephone number of the proposed agency's contact 
person should be included.

(iii)  Governor's proposed selection of a State coordinator in 
accordance with 1940.957 of this subpart, including the title, 
address, and telephone number.

(iv)  Development of area development plans for all areas of 
the State that are eligible to receive assistance from 
designated rural development programs.

(v)  The review and evaluation of area development plans by the 
panel in accordance with 1940.956 of this subpart.

(vi)  Development of written policy and criteria used by the 
panel to review and evaluate area plans in accordance with 
1940.956 of this subpart.

(vii)  Development of written policy and criteria the panel 
will use to evaluate and rank applications in accordance with 
1940.956 of this subpart.

(3)  Preparation of a proposed budget that includes 3 years 
projections of income and expenses associated with panel operations.  
If funds from other sources are anticipated, sources and amounts 
should be identified.

(4)  Development of a financial management system that will provide 
for effective control and accountability of all funds and assets 
associated with the panel.


4

1940.954 (a) (Con.)  	  RD Instruction 1940-T


(5)  A schedule to coordinate the submission, review, and ranking 
process of preapplications/applications in accordance with 1940.956 
(a) of this subpart.

(6)  Other information provided by the State in support of its 
application.

(b)  Selecting States.  The Under Secretary will review the application 
and other information submitted by the State and designate not more than 
five States to participate during any established time period.

(c)  Notification of selection.

(1)  The Under Secretary will notify the Governor of each State 
whether or not the State has been selected for further consideration 
in this program.  If a State has been selected, the notification 
will include the additional information that the Governor must 
submit to the Under Secretary in order for the State to meet 
eligibility requirements in accordance with paragraph (d) of this 
section.

(2)  A copy of the notification to the Governor will be submitted to 
the Administrator along with a copy of the State's application and 
other material submitted in support of the application.

(d)  Determining State eligibility.  

(1)  The Governor will provide the Under Secretary with evidence 
that the State has complied with the eligibility requirements of 
paragraph (a)(2) of this section not later than September 1, 1992, 
for the first established time period and not later than September 1 
for each of the remaining established time periods.

(2)  The Under Secretary will review the material submitted by the 
Governor in sufficient detail to determine if a State has complied 
with all eligibility requirements of this subpart.  The panel will 
not begin reviewing and ranking applications until the Governor has 
been notified in writing by the Under Secretary that the State has 
been determined eligible and is designated to participate in this 
program.  A copy of the notification will be sent to the 
Administrator.  The Under Secretary's decision is not appealable.

(e)  Eligibility requirements.  

(1)  With respect to this subpart, the Under Secretary may determine 
a State to be an eligible State provided all of the following apply 
not later than October 1 of each FY: 



5

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.954 (e)(1) (Con.)


(i)  The State has established a rural economic development 
review panel that meets the requirements of 1940.956 of this 
subpart;

(ii)  The Governor has appointed an officer or employee of the 
State government to serve as State coordinator to carry out the 
responsibilities set forth in 1940.957 of this subpart; and

(iii)  The Governor has designated an agency of the State 
government to provide the panel and State coordinator with 
support for the daily operation of the panel.

(2)  If a State is determined eligible initially and desires to 
participate in additional time periods established for this program, 
the Governor will submit documents and information not later than 
September 1 of each subsequent FY in sufficient detail for the Under 
Secretary to determine, prior to the beginning of the additional 
time period, that the State is still in compliance with all 
eligibility requirements of this subpart.

1940.955  Distribution of program funds to designated States.

(a)  States selected to participate in the first established time period 
will receive funds from designated rural development programs according 
to applicable program regulations until the end of FY 1992, if necessary 
for States to have sufficient time to meet the eligibility requirements 
of this subpart, and to be designated to participate in this program.  No 
funds will be administered under this subpart to an ineligible State.  

(b)  If a State becomes an eligible State any time prior to the end of FY 
1992, any funds remaining unobligated from a State's FY 1992 allocation, 
may be administered under this subpart.

(c)  Beginning in FY 1993 and for each established time period 
thereafter, all designated rural development program funds received by a 
designated State will be administered in accordance with 1940.961 
through 1940.965 of this subpart, provided the State is determined 
eligible prior to the beginning of each FY in accordance with 1940.954 
of this subpart.  No assistance will be provided under any designated 
rural development program in any designated State that is not an eligible 
State.







6

RD Instruction 1940-T


1940.956  State rural economic development review panel.

(a)  General.  In order for a State to become or remain an eligible 
State, the State must have a rural economic development panel that meets 
all requirements of this subpart.  Each designated State will establish a 
schedule whereby the panel and Rural Development will coordinate the 
submission, review, and ranking process of preapplications/applications.  
The schedule will be submitted to the Under Secretary for concurrence and 
should consider the following:

(1)  Timeframes should assure that applications selected for funding 
from the current FY's allocation of funds can be processed by Rural 
Development and funds obligated prior to the July 15 pooling 
established in 1940.961 (c) of this subpart;

(2)  Initial submission of preapplications/applications from Rural 
Development to the panel and any subsequent submissions during the 
first year;

(3)  How often during each FY thereafter should Rural Development 
submit preapplications/applications to the panel for review and 
ranking;

(4)  Number of working days needed by the panel to review and rank 
preapplications/applications;

(5)  Number of times during the FY the panel will submit a list of 
ranked preapplications/applications to Rural Development for funding 
consideration;

(6)  Consider the matching of available loan and grant funds to 
assure that all allocated funds will be used;

(7)  How to consider ranked preapplications/applications at the end 
of the FY that have not been funded; and

(8)  How to consider requests for additional funds needed by an 
applicant to complete a project that already has funds approved; 
i.e., construction bid cost overrun.

(b)  Duties and responsibilities.  The panel is required to advise the 
State Director on the desirability of funding applications from funds 
available to the State from designated rural development programs.  In 
relation to this advice, the panel will have the following duties and 
responsibilities:

(1)  Establish policy and criteria to review and evaluate area plans 
and to review and rank preapplications/applications.


7

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.956 (b)(1) (Con.)


(i)  Area plan.  The panel will develop a written policy and 
criteria to use when evaluating area plans.  The criteria to be 
used when evaluating area plans will assure that the plan 
includes, as a minimum, the technical information included in 
1940.959 of this subpart.  The criteria will be in sufficient 
detail for the panel to determine that the plan is technically 
and economically adequate, feasible, and likely to succeed in 
meeting the stated goals of the plan.  The panel will give 
weight to area-wide or regional plans and comments submitted by 
intergovernmental development councils or similar organizations 
made up of local elected officials charged with the 
responsibility for rural area or regional development.  A copy 
of the policy and evaluating criteria will be provided to Rural 
Development.

(ii)  Applications.  The panel will annually review the policy 
and criteria used by the panel to evaluate and rank 
preapplications/applications in accordance with this subpart.  
The panel will assure that the policy and criteria are 
consistent with current rural development needs, and that the 
public has an opportunity to provide input during the 
development of the initial policy and criteria.  The Governor 
will provide a copy of the initial policy and criteria 
established by the panel when submitting evidence of 
eligibility in accordance with 1940.954 of this subpart.  
Annually, thereafter, and not later than September 1 of each 
FY, the State coordinator will send the Under Secretary 
evidence that the panel has reviewed the established policy and 
criteria.  The State coordinator will also send the Under 
Secretary a copy of all revisions.

(A)  The policy and criteria used to rank applications for 
business related projects will include the following, 
which are not necessarily in rank order:

(1)  The extent to which a project will stimulate 
rural development by creating new jobs of a permanent 
nature or retaining existing jobs by enabling new 
small businesses to be started, or existing 
businesses to be expanded by local or regional area 
residents who own and operate the businesses.

(2)  The extent to which a project will contribute to 
the enhancement and the diversification of the local 
or regional area economy.


8

1940.956 (b)(1)(ii)(A) (Con.)	  RD Instruction 1940-T


(3)  The extent to which a project will generate or 
retain jobs for local or regional area residents.

(4)  The extent to which a project will be carried 
out by persons with sufficient management 
capabilities.

(5)  The extent to which a project is likely to 
become successful.

(6)  The extent to which a project will assist a 
local or regional area overcome severe economic 
distress.

(7)  The distribution of assistance to projects in as 
many areas as possible in the State with sensitivity 
to geographic distribution.

(8)  The technical aspects of the project.

(9)  The market potential and marketing arrangement 
for the projects.

(10) The potential of such project to promote the 
growth of a rural community by improving the ability 
of the community to increase the number of persons 
residing in the community and by improving the 
quality of life for these persons.

(B)  The policy and criteria used to rank 
preapplications/applications for infrastructure and all 
other community facility-type projects will include the 
following which are not necessarily in rank order:

(1)  The extent to which the project will have the 
potential to promote the growth of a rural community 
by improving the quality of life for local or 
regional residents.

(2)  The extent to which the project will affect the 
health and safety of local or regional area 
residents.

(3)  The extent to which the project will improve or 
enhance cultural activities, public service, 
education, or transportation.


9

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.956 (b)(1)(ii)(B) (Con.)


(4)  The extent to which the project will affect 
business productivity and efficiency.

(5)  The extent to which the project will enhance 
commercial business activity.

(6)  The extent to which the project will address a 
severe loss or lack of water quality or quantity.

(7)  The extent to which the project will correct a 
waste collection or disposal problem.

(8)  The extent to which the project will bring a 
community into compliance with Federal or State water 
or waste water standards.

(9)  The extent to which the project will consolidate 
water and waste systems and utilize management 
efficiencies in the new system.

(2)  Review and evaluate area plans.  Each area plan submitted for a 
local or regional area will be reviewed and evaluated by the panel.  
After an area plan has been reviewed and evaluated in accordance 
with established policy and criteria:

(i)  The panel will accept any area plan that meets established 
criteria unless the plan is incompatible with any other area 
plan for that area that has been accepted by the panel; or

(ii)  The panel will return any area plan that is technically 
or economically inadequate, not feasible, is unlikely to be 
successful, or is not compatible with other panel-accepted area 
plans for that area.  When an area plan is returned, the panel 
will include an explanation of the reasons for the return and 
suggest alternative proposals.

(iii)  The State coordinator will notify the State Director, in 
writing, of the panel's decision on each area plan reviewed.

(3)  Review and rank preapplications/applications.  The panel will 
review, rank, and transmit a ranked list of 
preapplications/applications according to the schedule prepared in 
accordance with paragraph (a) of this section, and the following:



10


1940.956 (b)(3) (Con.)	  RD Instruction 1940-T


(i)  Review preapplications/applications.  The panel will 
review each preapplication/application for assistance to 
determine if the project to be carried out is compatible with 
the area plan in which the project described in the 
preapplication/application is proposed, and either:

(A)  Accept any preapplication/application determined to 
be compatible with such area plan; or

(B)  Return to the State Director any 
preapplication/application determined not to be compatible 
with such area plan.  The panel will notify the applicant 
when preapplications/applications are returned to the 
State Director.

(ii)  Rank preapplications/applications.  The panel will rank 
only those preapplications/applications that have been accepted 
in accordance with paragraph (b)(3)(i)(A) of this section.  The 
panel will consider the sources of assistance and related 
activities in the State identified by the designated agency.  
Applications will be ranked in accordance with the written 
policy and criteria established in accordance with paragraph 
(b)(1)(ii) of this section and the following:

(A)  Priority ranking for projects addressing health 
emergencies.  In addition to the criteria established in 
paragraphs (b)(1)(ii) of this section, 
preapplications/applications for projects designed to 
address a health emergency declared so by the appropriate 
Federal or State agency, will be given priority by the 
panel.

(B)  Priority based on need.  If two or more 
preapplications/applications ranked in accordance with 
this subpart are determined to have comparable strengths 
in their feasibility and potential for growth, the panel 
will give priority to the applications for projects with 
the greatest need.

(C)  If additional ranking criteria for use by a panel are 
required in any designated rural development program 
regulation, the panel will give consideration to the 
criteria when ranking preapplications/applications 
submitted under that program.




11

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.956 (b)(3) (Con.)


(iii)  Transmit list of ranked preapplications/applications.  
After the preapplications/applications have been ranked, the 
panel will submit a list of all preapplications/applications 
received to the State coordinator.  The list will clearly 
indicate each preapplication/application accepted for funding 
and will list preapplications/applications in the order 
established for funding according to priority ranking by the 
panel.  The list will not include a preapplication/application 
that is to be returned to the applicant in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(3)(i)(B) of this section.  The State coordinator 
will send a copy of the list to the State Director for further 
processing of the preapplication/application in accordance with 
1940.965 of this subpart.  Once the panel has ranked and 
submitted the list to Rural Development and the State Director 
has selected a preapplication/application for funding, the 
preapplication/application selected will not be replaced with a 
preapplication/application received at a later date that may 
have a higher ranking.

(4)  Public availability of list.  If requested, the State 
coordinator will make the list of ranked 
preapplications/applications available to the public and will 
include a brief explanation and justification of why the project 
preapplications/applications received their priority ranking.

(c)  Membership.

(1)  Voting members.  The panel will be composed of not more than 16 
voting members who are representatives of rural areas.  The 16 
voting members will include the following:

(i)  One of whom is the Governor of the State or the person 
designated by the Governor to serve on the panel, on behalf of 
the Governor, for that year;

(ii)  One of whom is the director of the State agency 
responsible for economic and community development or the 
person designated by the director to serve on the panel, on 
behalf of the director, for that year;

(iii)  One of whom is appointed by a statewide association of 
banking organizations;

(iv)  One of whom is appointed by a statewide association of 
investor-owned utilities;

(v)  One of whom is appointed by a statewide association of 
rural telephone cooperatives;

12

1940.956 (c)(1) (Con.)	  RD Instruction 1940-T


(vi)  One of whom is appointed by a statewide association of 
noncooperative telephone companies;

(vii)  One of whom is appointed by a statewide association of 
rural electric cooperatives;

(viii)  One of whom is appointed by a statewide association of 
health care organizations;

(ix)  One of whom is appointed by a statewide association of 
existing local government-based planning and development 
organizations;

(x)  One of whom is appointed by the Governor of the State from 
either a statewide rural development organization or a 
statewide association of publicly-owned electric utilities, 
neither of which is described in any of paragraphs (c)(1) (iii) 
through (ix);

(xi)  One of whom is appointed by a statewide association of 
counties;

(xii)  One of whom is appointed by a statewide association of 
towns and townships, or by a statewide association of municipal 
leagues, as determined by the Governor;

(xiii)  One of whom is appointed by a statewide association of 
rural water districts;

(xiv)  The State director of the Federal small business 
development center or, if there is no small business 
development center in place with respect to the State, the 
director of the State office of the Small Business 
Administration;

(xv)  The State representative of the Economic Development 
Administration of the Department of Commerce; and

(xvi)  One of whom is appointed by the State Director from 
among the officers and employees of Rural Development.

(2)  Nonvoting members.  The panel will have not more than four 
nonvoting members who will serve in an advisory capacity and who are 
representatives of rural areas.  The four nonvoting members will be 
appointed by the Governor and include:

(i)  One from names submitted by the dean or the equivalent 
official of each school or college of business, from colleges 
and universities in the State;

13

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.956 (c)(2) (Con.)


(ii)  One from names submitted by the dean or the equivalent 
official of each school or college of engineering, from 
colleges and universities in the State;

(iii)  One from names submitted by the dean or the equivalent 
official, of each school or college of agriculture, from 
colleges and universities in the State; and 

(iv)  The director of the State agency responsible for 
extension services in the State.

(3)  Qualifications of panel members appointed by the Governor.  
Each individual appointed to the panel by the Governor will be 
specially qualified to serve on the panel by virtue of the 
individual's technical expertise in business and community 
development.

(4)  Notification of selection.  Each statewide organization that 
selects an individual to represent the organization on the panel 
must notify the Governor of the selection.

(5)  Appointment of members representative of statewide organization 
in certain cases.

(i)  If there is no statewide association or organization of 
the entities described in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the 
Governor of the State will appoint an individual to fill the 
position or positions, as the case may be, from among 
nominations submitted by local groups of such entities.

(ii)  If a State has more than one of any of the statewide 
associations or organizations of the entities described in 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the Governor will select one 
of the like organizations to name a member to serve during no 
more than one established time period.  Thereafter, the 
Governor will rotate selection from among the remaining like 
organizations to name a member. 

(d)  Failure to appoint panel members.  The failure of the Governor, a 
Federal agency, or an association or organization described in paragraph 
(c) of this section, to appoint a member to the panel as required under 
this subpart, shall not prevent a State from being determined an eligible 
State.





14


RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.956 (Con.)


(e)  Panel vacancies.  A vacancy on the panel will be filled in the 
manner in which the original appointment was made.  Vacancies should be 
filled prior to the third panel meeting held after the vacancy occurred.  
The State coordinator will notify the State Director, in writing, when 
the vacancy is filled or if the vacancy will not be filled.

(f)  Chairperson and vice chairperson.  The panel will select two members 
of the panel who are not officers or employees of the United States to 
serve as the chairperson and vice chairperson of the panel.  The term 
shall be for 1 year.

(g)  Compensation to panel members.

(1)  Federal members.  Except as provi2ded in 1940.960 of this 
subpart, each member of the panel who is an officer or employee of 
the Federal Government may not receive any compensation or benefits 
by reason of service on the panel, in addition to that which is 
received for performance of such officer or employee's regular 
employment.

(2)  NonFederal members.  Each nonfederal member may be compensated 
by the State and/or from grant funds established in 1940.968 of 
this subpart.  

(h)  Rules governing panel meetings.

(1)  Quorum.  A majority of voting members of the panel will 
constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business of the 
panel.

(2)  Frequency of meetings.  The panel will meet not less frequently 
than quarterly.  Frequency of meetings should be often enough to 
assure that applications are reviewed and ranked for funding in a 
timely manner.

(3)  First meeting.  The State coordinator will schedule the first 
panel meeting and will notify all panel members of the location, 
date, and time at least seven days prior to the meeting.  Subsequent 
meetings will be scheduled by vote of the panel.

(4)  Records of meetings.  The panel will keep records of the 
minutes of the meetings, deliberations, and evaluations of the panel 
in sufficient detail to enable the panel to provide interested 
agencies or persons the reasons for its actions.



15

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.956 (Con.)


(i)  Federal Advisory Committee Act.  The Federal Advisory Committee Act 
shall not apply to any State rural economic development review panel.

(j)  Liability of members.  The members of a State rural economic 
development review panel shall not be liable to any person with respect 
to any determination made by the panel.

1940.957  State coordinator.  

     The Governor will appoint an officer or employee of State government as 
State coordinator in order for a State to become and remain an eligible State 
under this subpart.  The State coordinator will have the following duties and 
responsibilities:

(a)  Manage, operate, and carry out the instructions of the panel;

(b)  Serve as liaison between the panel and the Federal and State 
agencies involved in rural development;

(c)  Coordinate the efforts of interested rural residents with the panel 
and ensure that all rural residents in the State are informed about the 
manner in which assistance under designated rural development programs is 
provided to the State pursuant to this subpart, and if requested, provide 
information to State residents; and

(d)  Coordinate panel activities with Rural Development.

1940.958  Designated agency.  

     The Governor will appoint a State agency to provide the panel and the 
State coordinator with support for the daily operation of the panel.  In 
addition to providing support, the designated agency is responsible for 
identifying:

(a)  Alternative sources of financial assistance for project 
preapplications/applications reviewed and ranked by the panel, and

(b)  Related activities within the State.

1940.959  Area plan.

     Each area plan submitted to the panel for review in accordance with 
1940.956 of this subpart shall identify the geographic boundaries of the area 
and shall include the following information:

(a)  An overall development plan for the area with goals, including business 
development and infrastructure development goals, and time lines based on a 
realistic assessment of the area, including, but not limited to, the 
following:


16

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.959 (a) (Con.)


(1)  The number and types of businesses in the area that are growing 
or declining;

(2)  A list of the types of businesses that the area could 
potentially support;

(3)  The outstanding need for water and waste disposal and other 
public services or facilities in the area;

(4)  The realistic possibilities for industrial recruitment in the 
area;

(5)  The potential for development of tourism in the area;

(6)  The potential to generate employment in the area through 
creation of small businesses and the expansion of existing 
businesses; and

(7)  The potential to produce value-added agricultural products in 
the area.

(b)  An inventory and assessment of the human resources of the area, 
including, but not limited to, the following:

(1)  A current list of organizations in the area and their special 
interests;

(2)  The current level of participation of area residents in rural 
development activities and the level of participation required for 
successful implementation of the plan;

(3)  The availability of general and specialized job training in the 
area and the extent to which the training needs of the area are not 
being met;

(4)  A list of area residents with special skills which could be 
useful in developing and implementing the plan; and

(5)  An analysis of the human needs of the area, the resources in 
the area available to meet those needs, and the manner in which the 
plan, if implemented, would increase the resources available to meet 
those needs.

(c)  The current degree of intergovernmental cooperation in the area and 
the degree of such cooperation needed for the successful implementation 
of the plan.

(d)  The ability and willingness of governments and citizens in the area 
to become involved in developing and implementing the plan.




17

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.959 (Con.)


(e)  A description of how the governments in the area apply budget and 
fiscal control processes to the plan.  This process is directed toward 
costs associated with carrying out the planned development.  When plans 
are developed, the financial condition of all areas covered under the 
plan should be fully recognized and planned development should 
realistically reflect the area's immediate and long-range financial 
capabilities.

(f)  The extent to which public services and facilities need to be 
improved to achieve the economic development and quality of life goals of 
the plan.  At a minimum, the following items will be considered:

(1)  Law enforcement;

(2)  Fire protection;

(3)  Water, sewer, and solid waste management;

(4)  Education;

(5)  Health care;

(6)  Transportation;

(7)  Housing;

(8)  Communications; and

(9)  The availability of and capability to generate electric power.

(g)  Existing area or regional plans are acceptable provided the plan 
includes statements that indicate the degree to which the plan has met or 
is meeting all the requirements in paragraphs (a) through (f) of this 
section.

1940.960  Federal employee panel members.

(a)  The State Director will appoint one Rural Development employee to 
serve as a voting member of the panel established in 1940.956 (c)(1) of 
this subpart.

(b)  The Administrator may appoint, temporarily and for specific 
purposes, personnel from any department or agency of the Federal 
Government as nonvoting panel members, with the consent of the head of 
such department or agency, to provide official information to the panel.  
The member(s) appointed shall have expertise to perform a duty described 
in 1940.956 (b) of this subpart that is not available among panel 
members.




18


RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.960 (Con.)


(c)  Federal panel members will be paid per diem or otherwise reimbursed 
by the Federal Government for expenses incurred each day the employee is 
engaged in the actual performance of a duty of the panel.  Reimbursement 
will be in accordance with Federal travel regulations.

1940.961  Allocation of appropriated funds.

(a)  Initial allocation.

(1)  Each FY, from sums appropriated for direct loans, loan 
guarantees, or grants for any designated rural development program, 
funds will be allocated to designated States in accordance with 
Subpart L of Part 1940, Exhibit A, Attachment 4, of this chapter 
(available in any Rural Development State or District Office).

(2)  Each FY, and normally within 30 days after the date Rural 
Development receives an appropriation of designated rural 
development program funds, the Governor of each designated State 
will be notified of the amounts allocated to the State under each 
designated program for such FY.  The Governor will also be notified 
of the total amounts appropriated for the FY for each designated 
rural development program.

(3)  The State Director will fund projects from a designated State's 
allocation of funds, according to appropriate program regulations 
giving great weight to the order in which the 
preapplications/applications for projects are ranked and listed by 
the panel in accordance with 1940.956 (b)(3) of this subpart.

(b)  Reserve.  A percentage of the National Office reserve established in 
Subpart L of Part 1940 of this chapter will be used to establish a 
reserve for designated States that is separate and apart from that of 
nondesignated States.  The percent reserved will be based upon the same 
criteria used in Subpart L of Part 1940 of this chapter to allocate 
program funds.

(c)  Pooling.

(1)  On July 15 of each FY, and from time to time thereafter during 
the FY, as determined appropriate, unobligated funds will be pooled 
from among the designated States.  Pooled funds will be made a part 
of the reserve established for designated States and will revert to 
National Office control.

(2)  Funds pooled from designated States can be requested by 
designated States, pursuant to subsection (d) of this section.  The 
designated States' pool; however, will not be available to 
nondesignated States until September 1 of each year.


19

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.961 (Con.)


(d)  Request for funds.

(1)  Designated States may request designated States' reserve funds, 
and funds for other designated rural development programs controlled 
by the National Office, as shown in Subpart L of Part 1940, Exhibit 
A, Attachment 4, of this chapter, in accordance with applicable 
program regulations.

(2)  Designated States may request funds from the nondesignated  
reserve account when:

(i)  All allocated and reserve funds to designated States have 
been used, or

(ii)  Sufficient funds do not remain in any designated State 
allocation and in the designated States' reserve account to 
fund a project.

1940.962  Authority to transfer direct loan amounts.

(a)  Transfer of funds.  If the amounts allocated to a designated State 
for direct Water and Waste Disposal or Community Facility loans for a FY 
are not sufficient to provide the full amount requested for a project in 
accordance with this subpart, the State Director may transfer part or all 
of the funds allocated to the State, from one program to another, subject 
to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section.

(b)  Limitation on amounts transferred.

(1)  Amounts transferred within a designated State.  The amount of 
direct loan funds transferred from a program under this section 
shall not exceed the amount left unobligated after obligating the 
full amount of assistance requested for each project that ranked 
higher in priority on the panel's list.

(2)  Amounts transferred on a National basis.  The amount of direct 
loan funds transferred in a FY, among the designated States, from a 
program under this subpart (after accounting for any offsetting 
transfers into such program) shall not exceed $9 million, or an 
amount otherwise authorized by law.

(c)  National Office concurrence.  The State Director may transfer direct 
loan funds authorized in this section, after requesting and receiving 
concurrence from the National Office.  If permitted by law, the National 
Office will concur in requests on a first-come-first-served basis.



20


RD Instruction 1940-T


1940.963  Authority to transfer guaranteed loan amounts.

(a)  Transfer of funds.  If the amounts allocated to a designated State 
for guaranteed Water and Waste Disposal, Community Facility, or Business 
and Industry loans for a FY are not sufficient to provide the full amount 
requested for a project in accordance with this subpart, the State 
Director may transfer part or all of the funds allocated to the State, 
from one program to another, subject to paragraphs (b) and (c) of this 
section.

(b)  Limitation on amounts transferred.  The amount of guaranteed loan 
funds transferred from a program under this section shall not exceed the 
amount left unobligated after obligating the full amount of assistance 
requested for each project that ranked higher in priority on the panel's 
list.

(c)  National Office concurrence.  The State Director may transfer 
guaranteed loan funds authorized in this section, after requesting and 
receiving concurrence from the National Office.  If permitted by law, the 
National Office will concur in requests on a first-come-first-served 
basis.

1940.964  [Reserved]

1940.965  Processing project preapplications/applications.

	Except for the project review and ranking process established in this 
subpart, all requests for funds from designated rural development programs 
will be processed, closed, and serviced according to applicable Rural 
Development regulations, available in any Rural Development office.

(a)  Preapplications/applications.  All preapplications/applications on 
hand that have not been selected for further processing will be submitted 
initially to the panel for review and ranking.  
Preapplications/applications on hand that had been selected for further 
processing prior to the time a State was selected to participate in this 
program may be funded by Rural Development without review by the panel.  
Preapplications/applications selected for further processing by Rural 
Development will not exceed the State's previous year's funding level.  
The State Director will provide the State coordinator a list of 
preapplications/applications that are in process and will be considered 
for funding without review by the panel.  This list will be provided at 
the same time preapplications/applications are initially submitted to the 
State coordinator in accordance with paragraph (d) of this section.

(b)  Rural Development review.  Preapplications/applications will be 
reviewed in sufficient detail to determine eligibility and, if 
applicable, determine if the applicant is able to obtain credit from 
other sources at reasonable rates and terms.  Normally, within 45 days 
after receiving a complete preapplication/application, Rural Development 
will notify the applicant of the eligibility determination.  A copy of 
all notifications will be sent to the State coordinator.

21

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.965 (Con.)


(c)  Applicant notification.  The notification to eligible applicants 
will contain the following statements:

"Your application has been submitted to the State coordinator for 
review and ranking by the State rural economic development review 
panel.  If you have questions regarding this review process, you 
should contact the State coordinator.  The address and telephone 
number are:  (insert).

"You will be notified at a later date of the decision reached by the 
panel and whether or not you can proceed with the proposed project.

"You are advised against incurring obligations which cannot be 
fulfilled without Rural Development funds."

These statements should be included in notifications to applicants with 
preapplications/applications on hand that had not been selected for 
further processing prior to the time a State was selected to participate 
in this program.

(d)  Information to State coordinator.  Rural Development will forward a 
copy of the preapplication/application and other information received 
from the applicant to the State coordinator according to a schedule 
prepared in accordance with 1940.956 (a) of this subpart.  The State 
coordinator will be advised that no further action will be taken on 
preapplications/applications until they have been reviewed and ranked by 
the panel, and a priority funding list has been received from the State.  
Applications forwarded to the State coordinator will be reviewed and 
ranked for funding in accordance with 1940.956 of this subpart.

(e)  The Rural Development review of priority funding list.  Rural 
Development will review the list of ranked applications received from the 
State coordinator and determine if projects meet the requirements of the 
designated rural development program under which the applicant seeks 
assistance.  Any project that does not meet program regulations will be 
removed from the list.  Applicants will be notified of the decision 
reached by the panel and whether or not the applicant should proceed with 
the project.  Rural Development will provide a copy of all notifications 
to the State coordinator.  The decisions of the panel are not appealable.

(f)  Obligation of funds.  Rural Development will provide funds for 
projects whose application remains on the list, subject to available 
funds.  Consideration will be given to the order in which the 
applications were ranked and prioritized by the panel.  If Rural 
Development proposes to provide assistance to any project without 
providing assistance to all projects ranked higher in priority by the 
panel than the project to be funded, 10 days prior to requesting an 
obligation of funds, the State Director will submit a report stating 
reasons for funding such lower ranked project to the following:



22


RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.965 (f) (Con.)


(1)  Panel.

(2)  National Office.  The National Office will submit a copy of the 
notification to:

(i)  Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives, 
Washington, DC.

(ii) Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the 
Senate, Washington, DC.

1940.966 - 1940.967  [Reserved]

1940.968  Rural Economic Development Review Panel Grant (Panel Grant).

(a)  General.  Panel Grants awarded will be made from amounts 
appropriated for grants under any provision of Section 306(a) of the 
CONACT [7 U.S.C. 1926(a)], not to exceed $100,000 annually to each 
eligible State.  This section outlines Rural Development's policies and 
authorizations and sets forth procedures for making grants to designated 
States for administrative costs associated with a State rural economic 
development review panel.

(b)  Objective.  The objective of the Panel Grant program is to make 
grant funds available annually to each designated State to use for 
administrative costs associated with the State rural economic development 
review panels meeting requirements of 1940.956 of this subpart.

(c)  Authorities, delegations, and redelegations.  The State Director is 
responsible for implementing the authorities in this section and to issue 
State supplements redelegating these authorities to appropriate Rural 
Development employees.  Grant approval authorities are contained in 
Subpart A of Part 1901 of this chapter.

(d)  Joint funds.  Rural Development grant funds may be used jointly with 
funds furnished by the grantee or grants from other sources.

(e)  Eligibility.  A State designated by the Under Secretary to 
participate in this program is eligible to receive not more than $100,000 
annually under this section.  A State must become and remain an eligible 
State in order to receive funds under this section.

(f)  Purpose.  Panel Grant funds may be used to pay for reasonable 
administrative costs associated with the panel, including, but not 
limited to, the following:

(1)  Travel and lodging expenses;

(2)  Salaries for State coordinator and support staff;


23

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.968 (f) (Con.)


(3)  Reasonable fees and charges for professional services necessary 
for establishing or organizing the panel.  Services must be provided 
by individuals licensed in accordance with appropriate State 
accreditation associations;

(4)  Office supplies, and

(5)  Other costs that may be necessary for panel operations.

(g)  Limitations.

	    Grant funds will not be used to:

(1)  Pay costs incurred prior to the effective date of the grant 
authorized under this subpart;

(2)  Recruit preapplications/applications for any designated rural 
development loan or grant program or any loan or grant program;

(3)  Duplicate activities associated with normal execution of any 
panel member's occupation.

(4)  Fund political activities;

(5)  Pay costs associated with preparing area development plans;

(6)  Pay for capital assets; purchase real estate, equipment or 
vehicles; rent, improve, or renovate office space; or repair and 
maintain State or privately owned property;

(7)  Pay salaries to panel members; or

(8)  Pay per diem or otherwise reimburse panel members unless 
distance traveled exceeds 50 miles.

(h)  Other considerations.

(1)  Equal opportunity requirements.  Grants made under this subpart 
are subject to Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as outlined 
in Subpart E of Part 1901 of this chapter.

(2)  Environmental requirements.  The policies and regulations 
contained in Subpart G of Part 1940 of this chapter apply to grants 
made under this subpart.

(3)  Management assistance.  Grantees will be provided management 
assistance as necessary to assure that grant funds are used for 
eligible purposes for the successful operation of the panel.  Grants 
made under this subpart will be administered under and are subject 
to the U.S. Department of Agriculture regulations, 7 CFR, Parts 3016 
and 3017, as appropriate.

24

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.968 (h) (Con.)


(4)  Drug-free work place.  The State must provide for a drug-free 
workplace in accordance with the requirements of RD Instruction 
1940-M (available in any Rural Development office).  Just prior to 
grant approval, the State must prepare and sign Form AD-1049, 
"Certification Regarding Drug-Free Workplace Requirements (Grants) 
Alternative I - For Grantees Other Than Individuals."

(i)  Application processing.

(1)  The State Director shall assist the State in application assembly 
and processing.  Processing requirements should be discussed during an 
application conference.

(2)  After the Governor has been notified that the State has been 
designated to participate in this program and the State has met all 
eligibility requirements of this subpart, the State may file an original 
and one copy of SF 424.1 with the State Director.  The following 
information will be included with the application:

(i)  State's financial or in-kind resources, if applicable, 
that will maximize the use of Panel Grant funds;

(ii)  Proposed budget.  The financial budget that is part of SF 
424.1 may be used, if sufficient, for all panel income and 
expense categories;

(iii)  Estimated breakdown of costs, including costs to be 
funded by the grantee or from other sources;

(iv)  Financial management system in place or proposed.  The 
system will account for grant funds in accordance with State 
laws and procedures for expending and accounting for its own 
funds.  Fiscal control and accounting procedures of the State 
must be sufficient to permit preparation of reports required by 
Federal regulations and permit the tracing of funds to a level 
of expenditures adequate to establish that grant funds are used 
solely for authorized purposes;

(v)  Method to evaluate panel activities and determine if 
objectives are met;

(vi)  Proposed Scope-of-Work detailing activities associated 
with the panel and time frames for completion of each task, and

(vii)  Other information that may be needed by Rural 
Development to make a grant award determination.

25

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.968 (i) (Con.)


(3)  The applicable provisions of 1942.5 of Subpart A of Part 1942 
of this chapter relating to preparation of loan dockets will be 
followed in preparing grant dockets.  The docket will include at 
least the following:

(i)  Form RD 400-4, "Assurance Agreement;"

(ii)  Scope-of-work prepared by the applicant and approved by 
Rural Development;

(iii)  Form RD 1940-1, "Request for Obligation of Funds," with 
Exhibit A of this subpart, and

(iv)  Certification regarding a drug-free workplace in 
accordance with RD Instruction 1940-M (available in any Rural 
Development office).  

(j)  Grant approval, obligation of funds, and grant closing.

(1)  The State Director will review the application and other 
documents to determine whether the proposal complies with this 
subpart.

(2)  Exhibit A of this subpart (available from any Rural Development 
State Office), shall be attached to and become a permanent part of 
Form RD 1940-1 and the following paragraphs will appear in the 
comment section of that form:

"The Grantee understands the requirements for receipt of funds 
under the Panel Grant program.  The Grantee assures and 
certifies that it is in compliance with all applicable laws, 
regulations, Executive Orders, and other generally applicable 
requirements, including those set out in RD 7 CFR, Part 1940, 
Subpart T, and 7 CFR, Parts 3016 and 3017, including revisions 
through _____ (date of grant approval).  The Grantee further 
agrees to use grant funds for the purposes outlined in the 
Scope-of-Work approved by Rural Development.  Exhibit A is 
incorporated as a part hereof."

(3)  Grants will be approved and obligated in accordance with the 
applicable parts of 1942.5 (d) of Subpart A of Part 1942 of this 
chapter.

(4)  An executed copy of the Scope-of-Work will be sent to the State 
coordinator on the obligation date, along with a copy of Form RD 
1940-1 and the required exhibit.  Rural Development will retain the 
original of Form RD 1940-1 and the exhibit.

(5)  Grants will be closed in accordance with the applicable parts 
of Subpart A of Part 1942 of this chapter, including 1942.7.  The 
grant is considered closed on the obligation date.

26


RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.968 (j) (Con.)


(6)  A copy of Form RD 1940-1, with the required exhibit, and the 
Scope-of-Work will be submitted to the National Office when funds 
are obligated.

(7)  If the grant is not approved, the State coordinator will be 
notified in writing of the reason(s) for rejection.  The 
notification will state that a review of the decision by Rural 
Development may be requested by the State under Subpart B of Part 
1900 of this chapter.

(k)  Fund disbursement.  Grant funds will be disbursed on a reimbursement 
basis.  Requests for funds should not exceed one advance every 30 days.  
The financial management system of the State shall provide for effective 
control and accountability of all funds, property, and assets.

(1)  SF 270, "Request for Advance or Reimbursement,"  will be 
completed by the State coordinator and submitted to the State 
Director not more frequently than monthly.

(2)  Upon receipt of a properly completed SF 270, the State Director 
will request funds through the Automated Discrepancy Processing 
System.  Ordinarily, payment will be made within 30 days after 
receipt of a properly prepared request for reimbursement.

(3)  States are encouraged to use minority banks (a bank which is 
owned by at least 50 percent minority group members) for the deposit 
and disbursement of funds.  A list of minority owned banks can be 
obtained from the Office of Minority Business Enterprises, 
Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230.

(l)  Title.  Title to supplies acquired under this grant will vest, upon 
acquisition, in the State.  If there is a residual inventory of unused 
supplies exceeding $5,000 in total aggregate fair market value upon 
termination or completion of the grant awarded, and if the supplies are 
not needed for any other federally sponsored programs, the State shall 
compensate Rural Development for its share.

(m)  Costs.  Costs incurred under this grant program are subject to cost 
principles established in Office of Management and Budget Circular A-87.

(n)  Budget changes.  Rebudgeting within the approved direct cost 
categories to meet unanticipated requirements which do not exceed 10 
percent of the current total approved budget shall be permitted.  The 
State shall obtain prior approval from the State Director for any 
revisions which result in the need for additional funding.

27

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.968 (Con.)


(o)  Programmatic changes.  The State shall obtain prior written approval 
from the State Director for any change to the scope or objectives for 
which the grant was approved or for contracting out or otherwise 
obtaining services of a third party to perform activities which are 
central to the purposes of the grant.  Failure to obtain prior approval 
of changes to the scope can result in suspension or termination of grant 
funds.

(p)  Financial reporting.  SF 269, "Financial Status Report," and a 
Project Performance Report are required on a quarterly basis.  The 
reports will be submitted to the State Director not later than 30 days 
after the end of each quarter.  A final SF 269 and Project Performance 
Report shall be due 90 days after the expiration or termination of grant 
support.  The final report may serve as the last quarterly report.  The 
State coordinator will constantly monitor performance to ensure that time 
schedules are met, projected work by time periods is accomplished, and 
other performance objectives are achieved.  Program outlays and income 
will be reported on an accrual basis.  Project Performance Reports shall 
include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1)  A comparison of actual accomplishments to the objectives 
established for that period;

(2)  Reasons why established objectives were not met;

(3)  Problems, delays, or adverse conditions which will affect the 
ability to meet the objectives of the grant during established time 
periods.  This disclosure must include a statement of the action 
taken or planned to resolve the situation; and

(4)  Objectives and timetable established for the next reporting 
period.

(q)  Audit requirements.  Audit reports will be prepared and submitted in 
accordance with 1942.17 (q)(4) of Subpart A of Part 1942 of this 
chapter.  The audit requirements only apply to the year(s) in which grant 
funds are received.  Audits must be prepared in accordance with generally 
accepted government auditing standards using publication, "Standards for 
Audits of Governmental Organizations, Programs, Activities and 
Functions."

(r)  Grant cancellation.  Grants which have been approved and funds 
obligated may be cancelled by the grant approval official in accordance 
with 1942.12 of Subpart A of Part 1942 of this chapter.  The State 
Director will notify the State coordinator that the grant has been 
cancelled.

(s)  Grant servicing.  Grants will be serviced in accordance with 
Subparts E and O of Part 1951 of this chapter.



28


RD Instruction 1940-T
1940.968 (Con.)

(t)  Subsequent grants.  Subsequent grants will be processed in accordance 
with the requirements of this subpart for each additional time period a State 
is designated to participate in this program.

1940.969  Forms, exhibits, and subparts.  

	Forms, exhibits, and subparts of this chapter (all available in any Rural 
Development office) referenced in this subpart, are for use in establishing a 
State economic development review panel and for administering the Panel Grant 
program associated with the panel.

1940.970  [Reserved]

1940.971  Delegation of authority.  

	The authority authorized to the State Director in this subpart may be 
redelegated.

1940.972 - 1940.999  [Reserved]

1940.1000  OMB control number.

	The collection of information requirements contained in this regulation 
has been approved by the Office of Management and Budget and assigned OMB 
control number 0575-0145.  Public reporting burden for this collection of 
information is estimated to vary from 30 minutes to 48 hours per response with 
an average of 4 hours per response, including the time for reviewing 
instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the 
data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.  Send 
comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection 
of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Department 
of Agriculture, Clearance Officer, OIRM, Room 404-W, Washington, DC 20250; and 
to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and 
Budget, Washington, DC 20503.


Attachment:  Exhibit A







oOo



29

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
Exhibit A
Page 1


REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATION OF RURAL ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PANEL GRANTS (PANEL GRANTS)

Attachment to Form RD 1940-1
"Request for Obligation of Funds"

Introduction.

This exhibit is a supplement to the information contained in RD Instruction 
1940-T and contains information regarding responsibilities of the Grantee for 
receipt of monies under the Panel Grant program.  This exhibit shall become a 
permanent part of Form RD 1940-1, "Request for Obligation of Funds."  The 
requirements set forth in this exhibit do not supercede the requirements for 
receipt of Federal grant funds as stated in Title 7, Parts 3016 and 3017 of 
the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR); however, specific areas related to the 
Panel Grant program are set forth below.

Panel Grants are awarded to defray administrative costs associated with a 
State rural economic development review panel established in accordance with 
RD Instruction 1940-T, 1940.956.  In consideration of said grant:

I.  Grantor and Grantee agree:

A.  This agreement shall be effective when Form RD 1940-1 has been 
executed by both parties.

B.  Information collected through this agreement is required to obtain a 
Panel Grant and will be used to determine that grant funds are used for 
authorized program purposes.

C.  Grant funds will not be used to replace any financial support 
previously provided for or assured from any other source.  The general 
level of expenditures by the Grantee for the benefit of the program 
covered by this agreement shall be maintained and not reduced as a result 
of the Federal share of funds received under this grant.

D.  Grant funds will be disbursed on a reimbursement basis not to exceed 
one advance every 30 days.  

1.  Standard Form (SF) 270, "Request for Advance or Reimbursement," 
will be used to request reimbursement of costs incurred by the 
Grantee.

2.  Where the Grantee claims credit for contributions-in-kind to the 
total cost of allowable expenses, the evaluation of these 
contributions shall be subject to reevaluation by the Grantor at any 
time, and any deficiency determined by the Grantor shall be 
compensated by supplemental contributions by the Grantee as a 
condition for further distribution by the Grantor.  Specific 
procedures in 7 CFR Part 3016 establishing the value of in-kind 
contributions will govern the evaluation.

(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
Exhibit A
Page 2


E.  Funds budgeted for the period covered by this exhibit are:

Federal Contribution             $_______________
Grantee Contribution
  Cash                            _______________
  In-kind                         _______________

Total                            $_______________

F.  Grantees are permitted to rebudget within the approved direct cost 
categories to meet unanticipated requirements which do not exceed 10 
percent of the current total approved budget.  Grantees shall obtain 
prior approval of the Grantor for any revisions which result in the need 
for additional funding.

G.  Title to supplies acquired under this grant will vest, upon 
acquisition in the Grantee.  If there is a residual inventory of unused 
supplies exceeding $5,000 in total aggregate fair market value upon 
termination or completion of the award, and if the supplies are not 
needed for other federally sponsored programs, the Grantee shall 
compensate the Grantor for its share.

H.  Use of grant funds for travel determined necessary to the program may 
be subject to the travel policies of the Grantee provided policies are 
uniformly applied regardless of the source of funds in determining the 
amounts and types of reimbursable travel expenses associated with panel 
operations.  If the Grantee does not have such specific policies 
uniformly applied, the Federal Travel Regulations shall apply in 
determining the amount charged to the grant.  The limitations established 
in RD Instruction 1940-T, 1940.968 (g) also apply.

I.  To the following termination provisions:

1.  Termination or temporary suspension of payment for cause.  The 
Grantor may terminate any grant in whole, or in part, or temporarily 
withhold payment, at any time before the date of completion, 
whenever it is determined that the Grantee has failed to comply with 
the conditions of the grant.  The Grantor shall promptly notify the 
Grantee in writing of the effects of suspension and/or reasons for 
the termination together with the effective date.

2.  Termination for convenience.  The Grantor or Grantee may 
terminate grants in whole, or in part, when both parties agree that 
the continuation of the program would not produce beneficial results 
commensurate with the further expenditure of funds.  The two parties 
shall agree upon the termination 

RD Instruction 1940-T
Exhibit A
Page 3


conditions, including the effective date, and in the case of partial 
terminations, the portion to be terminated.  The Grantee shall not 
incur new obligations for the terminated portion after the effective 
date, and shall cancel as many outstanding obligations as possible.  
The Grantor shall allow full credit to the Grantee for the Federal 
share of the noncancelable obligations, properly incurred by the 
Grantee prior to termination.

II.  Grantee agrees to:

A.  Manage the day-to-day operation of grant supported activities to 
assure compliance with applicable Federal requirements and that 
performance goals are achieved.

B.  Complete program within the total sums available to it, including 
said grant funds, in accordance with the approved Scope-of-Work and any 
necessary modifications thereof prepared by Grantee and approved by 
Grantor and in accordance with applicable Federal regulations.

C.  Assure that the purposes and Scope-of-Work for which this grant is 
made shall not duplicate programs for which monies have been received, or 
committed, or are applied to from other sources, public or private.

D.  Provide a financial management system which will account for grant 
funds in accordance with State laws and procedures for expending and 
accounting for its own funds.  Fiscal control and accounting procedures 
of the State must be sufficient to permit preparation of reports required 
by Federal regulations and permit the tracing of funds to a level of 
expenditures adequate to establish that grant funds are used solely for 
authorized purposes.

E.  Provide Grantor quarterly and annual financial and performance 
reports in accordance with requirements set forth in RD Instruction 1940-
T, 1940.968.

F.  Provide a single audit prepared in accordance with OMB Circular 
A-128.  The audit will be in sufficient detail to allow the Grantor to 
determine that funds have been used in accordance with the Scope-of-Work, 
any applicable laws and regulations, and this exhibit.

G.  Provide Grantor with such other reports as it may require and permit 
inspection of its operations by a designated representative of the 
Grantor.





(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN

RD Instruction 1940-T
Exhibit A
Page 4


H.  Retain financial and programmatic records, supporting documents, 
statistical records for each funding period for 3 years after the Grantee 
submits its last expenditure report, except that records will be retained 
beyond the 3-year period if audit findings have not been resolved.

I.  Execute Form RD 400-1, "Assurance Agreement," and any other 
agreements required by Grantor to implement the civil rights 
requirements.

J.  Permit Grantor or the Comptroller General of the United States, or 
any of their authorized representatives, the right of access to any 
pertinent books, documents, papers, or other records of Grantee which are 
pertinent to the grant in order to make audits, examinations, excerpts, 
and transcripts.  The rights of access shall last as long as the records 
are retained.

K.  Assure that no member of Congress shall be admitted to any share or 
part of this grant or any benefit that may rise therefrom.

L.  Make all nonconfidential information resulting from its activities 
available to the general public on an equal basis.

M.  Comply with property management standards established by 7 CFR Part 
3016, Uniform Administrative Requirements, relating to supplies or other 
expendable personal property.

N.  Relinquish any and all copyrights and/or privileges to the materials 
developed under this grant, such material being the sole property of the 
Federal Government.  In the event anything developed under this grant is 
published in whole or, in part, the material shall contain notice and be 
identified by language to the following effect:  "The material is the 
result of tax-supported research and as such is not copyrightable.  It 
may be freely reprinted with the customary crediting of the source."

O.  Abide by the policies promulgated in 7 CFR Part 3016, which provides 
standards for use by Grantee in establishing procedures for the 
procurement of supplies and other services with Federal grant funds.

P.  Upon default under its representations or agreements set forth in 
this exhibit, Grantee, at the option and demand of Grantor, will, to the 
extent legally permissible, repay to Grantor forthwith the original 
principal amount of the grant stated hereinabove, with interest equal to 
the rate of interest paid on U. S. 26-week Treasury Bills adjusted 
quarterly from the date of the default.  The provisions of this exhibit 
may be enforced by Grantor at its option and without regard to prior 
waivers by it of previous defaults of Grantee, by judicial proceedings to 
require specific performance of the terms of this exhibit or by such 
other proceedings in law or equity, in either Federal or State courts as 
may be deemed necessary by Grantor to assure compliance with the 
provisions of this exhibit and the law and regulations under which this 
grant is made.

RD Instruction 1940-T
Exhibit A
Page 5


Q.  Liquidate all obligations incurred under this grant not later than 90 
days after the end of the funding period to coincide with submission of 
the annual Financial Status Report, unless a request to extend this 
deadline is approved by the Grantor.

III.  This exhibit is subject to current Grantor regulations and any future 
regulations not inconsistent with the express terms thereof.











oOo





























(05-06-92)  SPECIAL PN
