PUBLIC NOTICE
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION  
1919 M STREET, N.W.
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20554                                 DA 98-1691

News media information 202/418-0500     Fax-On-Demand  202/418-2830     Internet:  http://www.fcc.gov    ftp.fcc.gov
                                
     COMMON CARRIER BUREAU SEEKS COMMENT ON THE WASHINGTON
   UTILITIES AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION'S AND TWENTY RURAL
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES' PETITION FOR AGREEMENT WITH
    DESIGNATION OF RURAL COMPANY ELIGIBLE TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIER SERVICE AREAS AT THE EXCHANGE LEVEL AND FOR APPROVAL OF
  THE USE OF DISAGGREGATION OF STUDY AREAS FOR THE PURPOSE OF
    DISTRIBUTING PORTABLE FEDERAL UNIVERSAL SERVICE SUPPORT
                                
                       CC DOCKET NO. 96-45

                                                Released:  August 24, 1998

Comment Date:  September 14, 1998
Reply Date:         September 28, 1998

     On August 17, 1998, the Washington Utilities and Transportation Commission ("WUTC"),
Asotin Telephone Company, CenturyTel of Cowiche, Ellensburg Telephone Company, CenturyTel
of Washington, Hat Island Telephone Company, Hood Canal Telephone Co., Inc., Inland Telephone
Company, Kalama Telephone Company, Lewis River Telephone Company, Mashell Telecom, Inc.,
McDaniel Telephone Company, Pend Oreille Telephone Company, Pioneer Telephone Company, St.
John, Co-operative Telephone and Telegraph Company, Tenino Telephone Company, The Toledo
Telephone Co., Inc., United Telephone Company of the Northwest, Western Wahkiakum County
Telephone Company, Whidbey Telephone Company, and Yelm Telephone Company (collectively,
"Petitioners") filed a Petition for Agreement with Designation of Rural Company Eligible
Telecommunications Carrier Service Areas at the Exchange Level and for Approval of the use of
disaggregation of study areas for the purpose of distributing portable federal universal service
support.  

     Pursuant to section 214(e)(5) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Federal Act), 47 U.S.C.  214(e)(5), and 47 C.F.R.  54.207, the
Petitioners petition the Federal Communication Commission (Commission) for agreement with
WUTC's service area designation which differ from the "study areas" of those companies designated
as eligible telecommunications carriers under the Federal Act.  In addition, pursuant to 47 C.F.R. 
1.3, the Petitioners also petition the Commission for a waiver of the Commission's existing method
of "porting" available universal service funds set forth in 47 C.F.R.  54.307 and for approval of a
proposed alternative methodology.  The Petitioners state that the proposed methodology reflects the
differences in costs for each exchange of the multi-exchange rural companies and also reflects the
differences in costs between densely populated and sparsely populated areas within exchanges.  The
Petitioners request that the amount of federal universal service support made portable be based on
the disaggregation of the service areas into two zones per exchange or wire center.  Further, the
Petitioners do not request, and assert that the proposed methodology does not require, any increase
in the amount of federal universal service support funds for Washington.  The Petitioners contend that
granting the Petition would encourage competition in rural areas by limiting the requirement that
competitors enter into an incumbent's entire "study area," which my include widely dispersed
exchanges, but it would minimize incentives of competitors to seek and serve only low cost customers
within a given rural exchange.

     Parties wishing to comment on the Joint Petition for Waiver are directed to file the comments
on or before September 14, 1998, to file reply comments on or before September 28, 1998, in
accordance with section 1.415 of the Commission's rules, 47 C.F.R.  1.415, and the procedures set
forth below.

Procedure for Filing

     All filings should reference:  Joint Petition for Agreement with Designation of Rural Company
Eligible Telecommunications Carrier Service Areas at the Exchange Level filed by:  the Washington
Utilities and Transportation Commission, Asotin Telephone Company, CenturyTel of Cowiche,
Ellensburg Telephone Company, CenturyTel of Washington, Hat Island Telephone Company, Hood
Canal Telephone Co., Inc., Inland Telephone Company, Kalama Telephone Company, Lewis River
Telephone Company, Mashell Telecom, Inc., McDaniel Telephone Company, Pend Oreille Telephone
Company, Pioneer Telephone Company, St. John, Co-Operative Telephone and Telegraph Company,
Tenino Telephone Company, The Toledo Telephone Co., Inc., United Telephone Company of the
Northwest, Western Wahkiakum County Telephone Company, Whidbey Telephone Company, and
Yelm Telephone Company, CC Docket No. 96-45, and should include the DA number shown on this
Public Notice.  Interested parties must file an original and six copies of their comments with the
Office of Secretary, Federal Communications Commission, Room 222, 1919 M Street, N.W.,
Washington, D.C. 20554.  Parties should send three copies of their comments to Sheryl Todd,
Common Carrier Bureau, Federal Communications Commission, 2100 M. St, N.W., 8th Floor,
Washington, D.C. 20554.  Parties should send one copy of their comments to the Commission's copy
contractor, International Transcription Service, 1231 20th Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036. 
Copies of documents filed with the Commission, including the Joint Petition for Waiver, may be
obtained from the International Transcription Service, 1231 20th Street, N.W., Washington, D.C.
20036, (202) 857-3800.  Documents are also available for review and copying at the FCC Reference
Center, Room 239, 1919 M Street, N.W., Washington, D.C., from 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.

     Parties may also file comments electronically via the Internet at: 
<http://www.fcc.gov/e-file/ecfs.html>.  Only one copy of an electronic submission must be submitted. 
In completing the transmittal screen, commenters should include their full name, Postal Service
mailing address, and the lead docket number for this proceeding, which is Docket No. 96-45. Parties
not submitting their comments via the Internet are also asked to submit their comments on diskette. 
Parties submitting diskettes should submit them to Sheryl Todd at the address noted above.  Such a
submission should be on a 3.5 inch diskette formatted in an IBM compatible format using
WordPerfect 5.1 for Windows or compatible software.  The diskette should be accompanied by a
cover letter and should be submitted in "read only" mode.  The diskette should be clearly labelled with
the party's name, proceeding (including the lead docket number in this case, Docket No. 96-45, type
of pleading (comment or reply comment)), date of submission, and the name of the electronic file on
the diskette.  Each diskette should contain only one party's pleadings, preferably in a single electronic
file.  In addition, parties must send copies to the Commission's copy contractor, International
Transcription Service, Inc., 1231 20th Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036.  

     Pursuant to section 1.1206 of the Commission's rules, 47 C.F.R.  1.1206, this proceeding
will be conducted as a permit-but-disclose proceeding in which ex parte communications are
permitted subject to disclosure.

     For further information, contact Adrian Wright, Accounting Policy Division, Common Carrier
Bureau at (202) 418-7400, TTY (202) 418-0484, or via e-mail: awright@fcc.gov. 

                                 
               -- Action by Accounting Policy Division --

     
     